---
title: Going off the rails, slowly
tags: journal
---

Some rather opionated observations on Zen, mostly related to how I see it
being spoken of in the r/zen Reddit community:

It's as though a new plant, growing in the forest, suddenly became aware of
itself and how different it was from everything else. Obsessed with its
differences it begins to enumerate them, define them, magnify them. Pretty
soon it knows what it is and what other things aren't and this is its world.

Enter Zen. Without saying that the plant is not a plant, Zen breaks down the
names and divisions, until the plant begins to see something that was
invisible before, since it's everywhere and nowhere: the ecosystem as a whole.
Of course, the ecosystem doesn't exist in any one place, you can't point to
it, you can't see it operating, but the whole organism of the forest is this
ecosystem and everything a momentary part of its operation. This is why the
plant is there, its role, and why it must also leave at some point. In this
view, life and death are not in conflict, they aren't even really divided.
There is just the great ongoing life of it all, ever-changing, always the
same.

Enter Zen practitioners. While Zen implies a degree of selflessness such that
the plant sees its own being as both essential to its awareness (being where
its see things from) and completely inessential -- sort of the way a body is
necessarily made up of cells, but no one cell is more "the body" than any
other -- Zen practitioners that I've read about seem to have gone off the
rails at some point, rather slowly. Instead of the plant unifying with the
undefinable ecosystem, it instead uproots itself, finds a lonely mountain or
social enclave apart from the majority, and settles itself there to stare at a
wall and contemplate nothing at all. Being empty of thought is "The Way", even
if the tenth ox painting would see you back at the tavern.

I just wouldn't expect Zen to lead anyone to think they were apart from me, or
better than me, or beyond me. I would expect them to know themselves *as* me
-- our real me -- without thought needed for it to be obvious.

I also think Zen gets confused with the purpose of life. I see it as a
rigorous methodology suited to becoming aware of, and then popping, the
non-existent-yet-interfering bubble of illusion with which the human mind is
entrapped due to how our thinking evolved from childhood. If you will, it aims
at birthing us from the caul of adolescent consciousness.

However, it says *almost nothing* about what is seen and experienced beyond
this point, since any attempt to do so would convey information that cannot,
by definition, be correctly processed.

Could you be an awakened person who adheres to a physical regimen of
systematic hedonism? I don't see why not. If anything, you simply wouldn't be
led by conceptions about it, or be attached to it as a means of emotive
ideation. Could you go the opposite direction and adhere to self-flagellating
asceticism? Sure. In this sense, I understand the method of Zen to be
"a-systematic", in that it eliminates the artificial systems we cling to, by
awakening to their non-being, in order to leave you free to interact with the
world how you will.

On the flip side, I take issue with the example presented by Bodhidharma,
which seems to suggest that the pinnacle of an awakened mind is to sit in
front of a wall for a decade. When Zen is taken to be "the whole deal", it
becomes far too nihilistic. It then seems to offer nothing but the elimination
of all established meaning, anywhere and everywhere, and leaving behind only
silence and void.

Instead, I think cancelling the "self" by means of awakening to the
ever-present void is merely the first moment of awareness, like waking up
after a long slumber. There is an entire world beyond that point, and none of
it (thankfully!) is to be found in the Writings of Zen masters. I admire the
purity of their devotion to exposing delusion, leaving us with no false dreams
to cling to.

Zen is great at striking you dumb in the face of mystery; but it should not be
seen as diminishing, in the slightness, the greatness of that mystery, or how
much is yet to be known of this existence.

The idea here is not that Zen isn't an additive game: it's that you're not
required to play any game, no matter how real or necessary others believe it
to be. How you react to a situation, how you feel about it, how you see it, is
not determined by that situation or forced upon you, but arises from the fact
that *you agreed to play by its rules*. You can't find your way out by gaming
the system or beating the rules, as that only gives them further strength and
validity. You have to see the nature of your imprisonment and then you can
decide what you want to do, freely.

> "We never had to take any of it seriously, did we?" she whispered.
> "No, we never had to." -- Atlas Shrugged

> "You think that's air you're breathing?" -- Morpheus
