# Text

Although what I have to share today is going to be difficult and I'll be
asking you to do things that are unpleasant and uncomfortable, yet I want you
to know that deep down, this is a message of joy. Because as a species we've
been weighed down by shackles we cannot see. We were created to soar, but
we've spent lifetimes struggling in the dirt. Once we find the willingness to
take whatever it takes to free ourselves and get past this burden, let me tell
you the outcome will be glorious for all of us, not just a few.

# Text

Dawnée has pointed out to me on several occasions that I am a spiritual being
having a physical experience. When I read these Writings, I hear Shoghi
Effendi offering a way to connect with my spiritual nature. Each day, in fact,
I have to reflect on what it is that I seek and the nature of _that_ beauty —
multiple times because the world is so anxious to seduce my material nature.

The nature of this world is a test to determine where along the spectrum from
material to spiritual I will personally choose to dwell. As I view myself
toward the material end, my scope is local and addresses what I mostly have
control view. But as my sense of identity shifts to the other end of that
spectrum, my scope is more and more universal and beyond what I can observe
and control. I have to use faith to gain perspective on who I am in that
place.

# Text

Little do we know it, but we've been robbed of who we are.

# Text

"Is this not what Race Unity is all about?"

I don’t believe that race unity is about me, as a white person, seeing the
value and uniqueness of all people. It is about those oppressed due to their
perceived race being able to tell me that their oppression has ended. Until
then, my opinions and outlook are borderline irrelevant. What I have to do —
my duty in this struggle — is to identify and fight against those tendencies
and systems that perpetuate this oppression in society.

And yes, I am intentionally shifting responsibility toward those who created
the problem (white Europeans and their descendants, who financially benefited
from enslaving Africans), and identification of solutions to those most
affected by the outcome (the ancestors of those Africans). That may seem
unbalanced at first, but it has never been an “equal playing field”: although
an even distribution of responsibility and assessment may seem like equity, in
the presence of injustice it is not. True equity must compensate for existing
inequalities.

Some of the arguments you’ve used in favor of the linked article have been
heard too often in this struggle: “Everyone is unique, you can’t generalize,”
“We should listen to all sides,” “We need to regard all people equally and not
according to background,” etc. Unfortunately, all of these statements are used
— often — to defuse and distract from the critical urgency of the situation.
For example, when we say that everyone is unique, suddenly no criticism can be
made of anyone, because there is always someone to whom it doesn’t apply; if
we must regard all opinions equally, suddenly it’s not about facts but rather
the perception of “fairness”, etc. And guess who gets to decide what counts as
fair in those situations?

Carol Grady Mansour makes the excellent point that by giving space to those
who refuse to fully acknowledge systemic racism, rather than supposedly adding
texture and depth to the debate, this only diminishes and devalues the facts.
We don’t need to hear even a single word more from those who stand in defense
of “white rightness”, because we’ve been hearing from them _literally_ for
centuries. For even if CRT were hugely overstating the situation, it would
still be more corrective to adopt that view for several generations than to
constantly downplay and resist every time an effort is made to clearly and
soberly examine the history of slavery, how much this country’s economic
success was built upon it, and in how many different ways it has been
perpetuated since its supposed abolishment.

The situation is very much like a plaintiff before a judge whose appeals for
justice are repeatedly rejected because his statements are not perfect enough,
or don’t take everyone’s feelings keenly enough into account — all while the
real criminal continues to benefit from the court’s inaction.

And although I myself have never been someone who holds political or
institutional power, I am most definitely "complicit by default" in the
Machine that sustains inequity in our shared society. The reason being that if
I relax into not thinking about racism and not saying anything about it — and
this is a very natural state for me to be in, as easy as breathing — then
those who hold political and institutional authority will view my silence as
consent for their behavior, simply because I represent the _category_ of
people they’re seeking to appease.

Racists don’t wonder if I support them as an individual. They rely on the
consent of the majority, and look to me to strengthen that majority. Only by
speaking up and speaking out can I show that this is unacceptable, and that if
they want my support for anything in future, I will need to see change. This
is true in politics, at work, in friend groups, at home, everywhere.

But I can’t push against an unseen and implacable enemy by considering every
human being one-on-one. That would be beyond exhausting; and those who don’t
want to see change know this, and so they promote the idea that everyone is a
special case who needs individual attention — the idea being to drain those
fighting injustice, by diluting the enemy until you’re forced to reckon with
the river by counting all of its drops.

Note that I'm not counting you in the group opposed to justice, but rather
wanted to point out some of the "notes" in your original comment that Carol
may be responding to. It rhymes with other things we've heard far too often,
and that only make a hard job that much harder.

# Text

Ketziah performed some spiritual chiropractics on me today. I don’t know what
you did; I was into the call as usual, but then you shifted something and
cracked open a door; and then Aziza and Carol and Bennett’s quote and
Martine….

  I feel like a young kitten,
  head on its mother’s lap,
  kneading gently and
  taking in the milk of truth and reality,
  until soon it’s strong enough
  to open new, curious eyes
  and bear the light.

The people in this room, I’m going to tell you, you are mid-wifing a soul, my
soul — and I can feel it happening. If I knew that choosing love for the Pupil
of the Eye had this power… I could have skipped a lot of silliness.

I personally feel like SOTE, *me* in particular, have this layer of social fat
on me, to keep me warm in this cold, hard country we’ve made. You all melt me,
I feel it dripping off.

# Text

May I suggest that in sensitive conversations like this, once we start
comparing degrees of suffering we have perhaps missed the point. I had
understood Robert's original comment to be saying something along these lines
(and I beg his forgiveness for my elaboration): Why do we emphasize Iranian
suffering when there are so many Black people suffering from racism here and
now? Which, if addressed, would help us solve such problems everywhere in the
world, as has been promised in our Writings?

I think this is a point worthy of contemplation, yet we've diverged into many
side topics that have obscured this point; made people's concerns feel
diminished; and in general have made the bitter subject of racism yet again
difficult to discuss openly and frankly in a public Bahá’í context.

What can solve our problems is for us to become closer in the truth, so that
we can find the meaning of justice and thus establish unity. Where that begins
is listening intently when a person who is actively suffering brings something
to our attention; not by comparing sufferings or bringing up events from over
a century ago, however painfully acute the memory may be. Talking a lot about
Persian suffering and not so much about Black suffering is something our
community does, is doing, has a problem with, and needs to be more aware of.

It's not that we are not one soul in many bodies: one race, one being, one
reality; it's that the world does not recognize this, and we are part of that
world. We are still working to educate and free ourselves from its pernicious
influence. Until Robert no longer feels the sharp edge of this distinction
being made on the basis of color, it is careless for us to assert that it does
not exist. We have to address the "social reality" in our communities --
*because* it is false -- until we dissolve it through just laws and just
behaviors.

Even implying it is not real does not address the damage caused by those who
still act as though it were. It only makes it harder to talk about!

Further, I think the Pupil of the Eye is a profound designation. One of the
things I understand it to mean is that our collective vision of humanity
cannot become clear until the Pupil of the Eye confirm this vision. That is,
nothing we say about racial justice and race unity can be definitive, until
the POTE themselves declare that we have achieved this unity. They have the
vision, the awareness, and a sensitivity to these issues that we lack. So in
all these discussions, we must show our eagerness to reach out, listen and
learn, almost like blinded men being guided down the right path toward social
justice.

As ‘Abdu’l-Bahá says in Some Answered Questions: "... it is known that the
pupil of the eye is black so as to attract the rays of the sun, for if it were
another color -- that is, uniformly white -- it would not attract the rays of
the sun."

# Poem

Please send my love to Tahirih,
her memory is ever like the sun
that shines on my heart
once the clouds of forgetting do part.

# Racism PLP

I want to see the faces, the bright lights, that are missing from our
gatherings; and I want to see that they are missing, and why: Why I accepted
it as normal, acceptable, or not to be questioned. Why I found it more
comfortable not to push back, or gradually avoided the confrontation that
challenging this might raise. I want to know how my worldview became so
blinded, how the blood drained out from my understanding of the unity of
humankind.

But most of all, I want to find those faces, because in finding them I can
find my spiritual destiny. To venture into the mystic fields at the heart of
the﻿ Bahá’í Writings, but without friends of every shape and color standing
beside me, hand in hand, is to miss the point. I feel like a person who has
loved reading about sailing, but all of his life remained on dry land. Real
unity, where there is real justice and real perception of unique value, has
nothing to do with the comfortable places where my ignorance has been nurtured
and kept.

I want to learn the history of those of African descent, their culture, what
has been done, what has not been done, what is still happening. I want to see
the whole of it, not as a research curiosity or in hope of rescuing myself
from the labels of whiteness and ignorance. Rather, I want to grow up. To
allow someone whom I ought to regard as a brother or sister, loved as my
Beloved is loved -- and yet allow them to suffer in silence, to bear every day
the brunt of oppression, who enter spaces of "unity" only to be shunned for
their differences: until these things become unbearable to me, I have learned
nothing.

I do this in hope of moving forward, together. I accept my past mistakes, the
well-deserved blame for my silence, the wrong-headedness, the weakness of
character. I will let these become fertile soil to grow something new: an
appreciation, so deep, of what the Pupil of the Eye have to offer our Faith,
that I become enamored of its possibilities. Anything less is to fail to see
what ﻿Bahá’u’lláh meant when He chose this designation; and if I cannot truly
learn to know humanity this way, then really my services are just make
believe. I have been a puppet of materialistic and political forces from the
moment I was born. My PLP is to cut the strings, and come to know my real
friends.

# Text

As I think about your question, three conceptions of truth and knowledge come
to mind.

First is logical or mathematical truth. This is the simplest, since truth here
is plainly defined as what is inductively reducible to whatever the one has
chosen to mean “true”. Knowledge in this system is the ever-growing body of
definitions which have been demonstrated to be true in that way.

Second is real or physical truth. This is largely an approximation, where
truth is defined as whatever is repeatable and commonly observable. Knowledge
here is of two kinds: evidentiary; or by relation to a model that offers
reliable predictions. Historically the knowledge we’ve gained in this sphere
has at some point been either upturned or further qualified, and I expect we
will always be advancing here without final statements of what is true or not.

Third is ideal or divine truth. This one is the most difficult, because even
the simplest statements, like “God is Most Glorious” depend on a right
understanding of “God”, “is” and “Glorious”. I think that while logical truth
is definitional, and physical truth is operational, divine truth is
aspirational. It is a light in the darkness that leads us to places we might
not have chosen for ourselves. But I don’t know if truth and knowledge in this
domain are small enough to fit within the frame of human thinking. We work
among the shadows cast, not its brilliant Sun.

# What is it like to be a deeply religious person?

Date: 2017-08-12

Mostly for me it means thinking all the same thoughts you do, but with the
addition of the following:

 1. Existence includes more than the physical world we see.
 2. People have an aspect to them, the soul, that continues beyond this
    experience of life.
 3. The laws of all these worlds was laid down by a conscious Being.
 4. Individuals have been chosen to communicate these laws, and certain
    details of the world beyond.

I don’t believe in God or the other worlds by themselves because I can’t see
them, and have no experiential evidence of any kind that they exist. The crux
of the matter comes down to believing in whoever says they are real (e.g.,
Jesus, Muhammad, Moses, etc.).

I think the real difference to “religious thinking” (for many religions,
though not all) is the integration into one’s world view that these realities
not only exist, but my actions here impact how I connect to them; that I have
a soul, and certain qualities (faith, love, how I act) impact the welfare of
that soul.

That said, as a Bahá’í I believe that scientific truth should trump religious
truth when the two disagree, since the former is based on real evidence, while
the latter is too easily subject to personal opinions and point of view.

# What is it like to feel the holy spirit?

I'm curious to know what its like to feel the holy spirits presence. I've had
no prior experience with it whatsoever.

Date: 2017-02-09

It's hard to know whether a personal experience is really the Holy Spirit, or
just personal imagination, but for me: imagine laying back into a warm bath,
the heat moving into your body as if by fingers of some unseen light, and
suddenly you feel as if you've always known this feeling, womb-like, showing a
path before you whose wonderful mysteries can never cease to unfold. There is
very little that compares to it; even the things that do (on a physical level)
have a sense of shallow fleetingness that does not begin to compare with the…
endless promise of this other thing. It feels like coming home, if home is
where you've always longed to be, even since you were just two cells put
together.

# Why do some people think that they know everything?

Date: 2017-01-29

A fish in a tiny bowl
knows his entire world;
yet still he remains
unaware of the sea.

# How does someone with a genius IQ conceive of God?

Date: 2016-11-25

Genius is not a well defined term, and the range of IQs it has been applied to
is large. For some definitions I fit within that range, for others I do not.
That said, I am believer in God, despite having this intelligence.

If you ask me how I conceive of God: I don’t. “God” is at best a symbol used
by humans to refer to a Reality we can never hope to understand — not to any
extent. We don’t even know how our own minds work, so it’s ludicrous to think
we could fathom the Creator of that mind: or love, or the human soul. I barely
understand why I prefer blueberries to raspberries; how I claim to know God?

What I believe in is those Divine Messengers who claim to have brought us
knowledge from God. Why I believe this is personal, and a different question
altogether. Yet even when these Individuals tell me that God exists and has a
plan for us, I still don’t know Who that God is, or the nature of His Essence.

That said, an infant doesn’t need to comprehend its mother to know her love,
or feed from her milk, nor does it need an accurate conception of her to have
a strong and lasting relationship.

# Text

I love how abstract these things can get. So hard to describe what you're
thinking. But we can try, and fail, and share in the silliness as we do.

Imagine there were a circle, a plain 2-dimensional space. On that circle was a
point, moving this way and that. The point sees itself as a separate entity,
and wonders about the vast range of the circle, and why one side is so
different from another. The circle, meanwhile, simply regards the point as a
*locus*, a momentary focus, knowing that as it ranges about the circle, it
sees many different things; while the circle abides.

In your own life, you dwell at the locus of what could be considered a larger
entity. I don't mean large physically, I mean in the way that raindrops, and
the umbrella they fall on, are points within a larger space we term "rain".
It's natural, in each moment, to see them as separate, and define them
independently; but in another sense, there's a common entity that gives them
meaning and one can intuit this reality in addition to the points.

There's one scifi book,
[Quarantine](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Quarantine_(Egan_novel)) where I feel
this idea was nicely touched upon. In that novel, he uses quantum incoherence
to express the idea of an "unbounded self", with the "locus" being the state
chosen by our will out of many potential eigenstates. Great read.

Anyway, long story short: you hurt when you fall or embarass yourself because
you identify with the one who fell. Living in the locus. I could quote lots of
stuff about Mind here, but if you know where I'm headed, I don't need to; and
if you don't, I'd just fail louder.

# Marriage

Marriage is a great suggestion, if you find a good partner who understands you
and your aspirations. I'd like to offer some advice, though, on the matter
itself.

I grew up with a pretty strong case of Obsessive Compulsive Disorder -- as in
I felt the need to touch door frames a certain number of times before I could
pass through them without anxiety. So I know what you mean by the struggle
between low compulsions and high intentions. I've also had a few decades to
think about it in the context of the Bahá’í Writings and becoming a
functioning member of the community.

First and foremost, you didn't choose this. God gives us our preferences and
inclinations. Society makes it FAR worse than it would have been in a simpler
age. What matters now is how we cope with the challenge. But I want you to
take yourself off the hook for the mere existence of the challenge itself.
Nothing bad or evil about yourself lead to this moment. Some of us are just
prone to addictive behavior. (If I had ever touched a cigarette in my youth,
I'd be a hopeless chain smoker right now).

The steed of the first valley is patience, and it is a very profound sort of
patience. Even if you find that your journey would last a hundred thousand
years, it says you should not falter. Imagine that! We have to become so
assured of God's love, support and grace, that even the thought of dwelling
for a hundred millennia in our poor condition would not dissuade us in the
least. This is something to meditate on.

The "logic" you mention: I've also observed that divine knowledge tends to
pass in phases through us. First it informs the mind and our understanding;
then it transforms our vision and what we're able to see; then it affects the
heart and our sensibilities; and finally it manifests in our behavior and
reactions to the world. It can take a long time for wisdom to move from the
Writings on the page to this final step. I've been working on, "If they poison
your lives, sweeten their souls," my entire life.

Your desire to soar in the heavens of purity and chastity: that's who you
really are. Yes, the body weighs you down, but as ‘Abdu’l-Bahá said, "The
spiritual world bestows only the joy! If we suffer it is the outcome of
material things..." Strive to shift your self-identification to these
aspirations, the things that are conducive to joy. The rest is simply not who
you are: it's your momentary condition. And as your identity moves toward the
spiritual, you should find you cannot hate this because it is pure accident.
Let that hate become pity and then compassion, and finally mercy toward others
who also suffer from it. You are fighting the true Jihad now, and it calls for
warriors of outstanding resolve: not in the sense of strictness, but of
overflowing spirit.

# merry no-christmas

You’ve come to a place that is prone to argue only one side of this question,
so I’ll play the paradoxical devil’s advocate:

Belief answers a question, but faith is demonstrated by living it: through
interaction with the world and your community. Going to church isn’t only a
restatement, any more than you’d stop seeing a girlfriend just because you’ve
already said you love her.

Lots of people meditate and spend years of their life studying koans because
they've heard about enlightenment or the Void or the Unborn and they want to
strip away delusions and see it for themselves. The fact they expend this time
and energy for the sake of something they’ve neither seen nor experienced: is
this not faith? Otherwise, why waste a year of effort with no return. Faith is
acting on behalf of an Unknown, that you cannot know yet feel connected to.

Christ as found in the Gospels is quite different than what you see in
churches, so I don’t blame you if it feels stale and out of place there. If
you study the lives of early Christian mystics, I think you’d find a lot more
in common with Zen than even most here would be willing to accept.

But it’s your existence and it’s worth exploring. Neither church nor r/zen are
the places for answers, but we’re happy to burrow into any set-doubt that
could lead to a moment’s realization.

You might even find that Zen can make church an interesting subject of
observation. Just watch out for the feeling that you’ve achieved an elevated
viewpoint above most others — which can lead to many of the other behaviors
you’ll find here too. Yet none of us know, because the mind isn’t the tool of
progress. We’re simply advocates of the ordinary, rather than believers in the
extraordinary.

# Text

Huangbo Xiyun: The arising and the elimination of illusion are both illusory.
Illusion is not something rooted in Reality; it exists because of your
dualistic thinking.

Good question, since I think it's neither active nor passive (perhaps a false
dichotomy in this case), so let me give a mundane example to illustrate:

For years of my life I pushed myself to meet certain goals, established by
society, that had so worked themselves down into my tissues that I didn't
recognize them as self-established (i.e., even if society authored them, I'm
the one who accepted them and gave them power).

In a sense, society told me to tie a carrot onto a long stick, and then tie
that stick to my back so the carrot would dangle about a foot in front of me.
Then it said, "Run, catch the carrot! All good people can catch the carrot!"
And off I went, happy when I felt like I was gaining ground, and sad when I
realized I hadn't.

One effect of studying Zen is that I observe my friends and family doing
something similar: stretching themselves on a rack of their own making --
while almost nothing I say makes any emotional difference to what they're
experiencing. It took me years to see both that the stick was there, and that
I was the one who had put it there and invested it with value, creating the
whole game.

So I ask you: Is seeing the existence of the stick and its emotional dynamic a
passive endeavor, or an active one? It may take years of observation and
discernment to notice what's happening, but only seconds to dismantle; or it
could take a few seconds in a near death experience and years to process. Or
it could happen just by sitting quietly until the absurdity of the rat race
dawns on you. Who knows what leads to the discovery, and how it's processed,
but I can vouch for the fact that it's easier said than realized.

This is only a mundane example, but mental concepts do this to our experience
of reality also: They setup a framework that promises to convey understanding,
meaning and value, but instead only reduce awareness down to a plastic
construct that is self-defined, such that to a large extent we seeing just
what we've decided we're seeing.

# Text

Huangbo, Bankei and Layman P'ang: There can be no death for what was never
born, so if it is unborn, it is obviously undying. There's no need to say it,
is there?

> There seems to be a problem inherent in the very limitations of perception:
  perceiving through the senses and being bound to thoughts tends to allow the
  mistakes of making great sweeping distinctions, as in this is mine and that
  is yours.

I would say the "problem" is that we learn early on how thoughts can influence
feeling, and that some feelings are preferable to others. So we begin to use
thought to engender feeling, and feeling to corroborate thought.

A friend the other day told me about a worry she had at work. I mentioned that
the future is an unknowably large cloud of possibilities, and although we can
associate probabilities to some of those events, we are far more often wrong
than right. Why do we choose the event we fear and "pre-live" it, in a sense,
magnifying that fear until it terrorizes us? It's almost as though we fear it
so much, we'd rather get the bad feelings out of the way, so when it really
happens it's just an event and not a shock.

But this is like thinking about the coldness of a lake before jumping in. This
makes it so much harder to take that first step. Better is to think about it
afterward, and let the shock roll through you.

If thought could not manipulate emotion, or if emotion did not influence
thought, we might stop trying to observe what could happen, or gaze at the
past reflecting on everything that did not happen.

# Letter of Resignation to LSA - Thoughts?

No Faith is easy to be a part of in its early days. Look at what happened to
the companions of Noah. It would have been almost impossible for anyone to
stay with Noah. Holding to a Manifestation of God during the time of awakening
is always difficult, and historically speaking, most people just don't. The
real numbers always come later, when we have grand churches, large communities
with established support systems, and commonly agreed upon doctrines.

To me, the community of today is an opportunity to serve, not to be served. I
can't expect it to be satisfying, fulfilling, or even easy most of the time.
We're scrambling to understand a Revelation that has never been seen before,
and its impact on current social systems is bound to be both damaging and
confusing, as old structures give ways to patterns of thinking outside our
present experience. In a way it's like giving birth: What happens in the
operating room is messy, smells awful, and is full of tension and even
screaming. It bears very little resemblance to what your experience of that
mother and child will be even a few weeks later, much less in the years to
come.

I think this question concerns the station of Bahá'u'lláh and the nature of
His Revelation. All else is secondary, even irrelevant. If I don't like some
of the laws, or if things seems illogical to me, then this is how I'm
experiencing the transformative effect of His Teachings:

> Know verily that the essence of justice and the source thereof are both
  embodied in the ordinances prescribed by Him Who is the Manifestation of the
  Self of God amongst men, if ye be of them that recognize this truth. He doth
  verily incarnate the highest, the infallible standard of justice unto all
  creation. Were His law to be such as to strike terror into the hearts of all
  that are in heaven and on earth, that law is naught but manifest justice.
  The fears and agitation which the revelation of this law provokes in men's
  hearts should indeed be likened to the cries of the suckling babe weaned
  from his mother's milk, if ye be of them that perceive. Were men to discover
  the motivating purpose of God's Revelation, they would assuredly cast away
  their fears, and, with hearts filled with gratitude, rejoice with exceeding
  gladness.

Or my favorite expression of this sentiment, from The Seven Valleys:

> | When the qualities of the Ancient of Days stood revealed,
  | Then the qualities of earthly things did Moses burn away.

  He who hath attained this station is sanctified from all that pertaineth to
  the world. Wherefore, if those who have come to the sea of His presence are
  found to possess none of the limited things of this perishable world,
  whether it be outer wealth or personal opinions, it mattereth not. For
  whatever the creatures have is limited by their own limits, and whatever the
  True One hath is sanctified therefrom; this utterance must be deeply
  pondered that its purport may be clear.

# This could've been my faith, had I only known.

As a lover of things mystical, I find there is an impossibly wide gulf between
our conceptions of God (which are always wrong) and our experience of God
(which is always mysterious). From this standpoint, even the word "God" does
us a disservice, since it lulls one into feeling we understand what we mean
when we say it.

In this respect, atheism is a kind of honesty: rejecting all concepts of the
Ocean based merely on second-hand reports, or one day's playing at the
seaside. Even the whales have seen only the briefest span of it.

So I applaud you for coming to such a point in your religious studies, but
would like to suggest that a new phase exists beyond it: a relationship not
based on knowledge or conceptions. Indeed, faith and death of self are needed
here, not rhetoric. "Be nothing then, and walk upon the waves." Which may seem
like madness in our intellectually-driven culture, but what is there to be
found is also, profoundly real.

| The compass of the mind
| is whatever it can conceive;
| but the bound of the heart
| is all that it believes.

# Losing faith

Here's a story I haven't told many people before...

When I was a kid, I hated olives. With a passion. It boggled my mind that any
human being could derive pleasure from them, in any way.

Likewise, when I found the Faith, I hated religion. I couldn't say the word
"God" without a bad taste in my mouth. I couldn't pray. It took a full year
before I could even read the Writings, it was just too awkward and bizarre to
me.

Time passed, and one day, while reading Herodotus' History, I became so
affected by his absolute raving love of all things olive that I decided to try
them again. Peloponnesus green olives. OMG!!!! They were so amazing!! I would
buy them by the pound, and eat the entire pound in one sitting while reading
chapter after chapter of the History. I put olive oil in my hair, on my skin
-- I went olive crazy. Nowadays, olive oil is all I ever put on my salads.

So I asked God: Can you please make prayer be like the olives?

Wanting didn't make it happen. Hoping didn't make it happen. It took decades
of thinking and trying and experimenting. There is no silver bullet unless God
wills it; but there is a promise: that anyone who makes the effort and is
patient will find their answer.

> Ask and it will be given to you; seek and you will find; knock and the door
  will be opened to you. For everyone who asks receives; he who seeks finds;
  and to him who knocks, the door will be opened.

  Which of you, if his son asks for bread, will give him a stone? Or if he
  asks for a fish, will give him a snake? So if you who are evil know how to
  give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father in heaven
  give good things to those who ask Him!

I wouldn't be discouraged if the path feels remote. If anything, you're
learning the true nature of the path by pushing through the brambles on the
side. The key, I think, is to strive for such patience, that even darkness
becomes a lesson about light. Where you are now is the perfect place to learn
about honesty, sincerity, purity of heart, and the attributes of a true
seeker. One who only thinks they've found, and mimicks all the right actions,
has yet to taste the sweetness that follows the bitter cup.

jwiegley

I relate to most of what you've said, as can some of my close Bahá'í friends.
I think this is just real life: ups and downs, times when things are clearer,
times when they are more obscure.

Once I couldn't say the obligatory prayer for almost a year. It felt too fake
to be praying to God from a place of obligation. It took 22 years to resolve
this within myself, likely due to upbringing.

It's like a "dark night of the soul", where I seem to be wandering through
some wilderness in a daze. You can't invent faith, or will it to appear. I
think the essential honesty of our soul drives us away from living a sham life
for appearances. We only have so much energy before we return to where we're
really at, spiritually.

The only constant in all of this, the unbreakable cord, if you will, was to
hold on to my most favorite selections from Bahá'u'lláh. In fact, my last funk
was finally dispelled by savoring the syllables of this quote:

> O Son of Love! Thou art but one step away from the glorious heights above
  and from the celestial tree of love. Take thou one pace and with the next
  advance into the immortal realm and enter the pavilion of eternity. Give ear
  then to that which hath been revealed by the pen of glory.

Going back to the heart connection with the Source, that is what brought
everything else back into perspective. It's not about the laws, or the
religion, or the teaching or not teaching: it is about nearness to God. Once
that goal is firmly fixed, the rest becomes a means to that end, on both a
personal and a global scale. But imperfectly so, since we're growing and
learning.

I can't say much more than that. Find Bahá'u'lláh in your heart of hearts, and
blind your eyes to all things else.

# Baha'i Mysticism and Mystical Practices

Interesting, I see it as affirming inner truths while correcting errors in
outward notions. For example, a person may say they worship the Sun, and don't
need an intermediary to connect with the Sun. Then Bahá'u'lláh tells them that
no one knows the Sun but for the Rays. He doesn't suggest that the believer's
relationship is wrong -- either way, he adores the Sun -- but He corrects a
misunderstanding that has led to countless, misguided philosophical disputes.

Aside from this, both Sufism, and this aspect of the Bahá'í Writings, speak
about transcending the limitations of the logical mind by the transports of
love ("teach it the science of the love of God!"), to the end that one may
recognize the True Source, and devote both heart and soul.

# Trust versus Faith

If I may hazard an analogy:

Lack of faith is like insisting you hear the punchline of a joke, before you
allow the joke to be told, because you fear wasting your time.

What we learn through faith is that patient listening sets up the moment of
sudden enjoyment, and should be savored as much as the end.

Only by relaxing can your hand grip something other than itself.

# I can’t grasp “grasp”

You can’t grasp at things, you can’t not grasp at things.... what do you do?

When you predicate existence on their being you and things that are not you,
this dilemma cannot be resolved. Your foot and your heart never argue about
identity, despite their difference. You’re equally unwilling to cut either of
them off, even though one is more expendable!

The problem isn’t in the grasping or not grasping. It’s the idea of things.
How can you grasp what you already hold, even though your hand may not be
around it? Who can take it away from you, if it also is who you are? And I
don’t mean the physical separation, that is obvious. I mean that the thing's
very thing-ness arises from Mind. See Huangbo’s example of the Void being
unchanged by the cycle of day and night.

You’re not facing an unsolvable problem: you’re accepting the premise that
there is a problem at all.

# Bathtub and Basket Koan

I think using mind as an interface with reality is like a thirsty one seeking
to know the Ocean through a straw. Such a minute part of the experience; all
it does is make you more thirsty, and leave a bad taste in the mouth.

The answer, of course, isn't a bigger or longer straw. Dive in! Instead of
tasting, you feel, you swim, you ken the deeps. Though you still don't know
anything, really, does a child need a reason to play?

Perhaps your "doubling up" is becoming aware of the straw? The mental
machinery that processes experience, so you can confirm you've really had an
experience? This is, after all, the source of "ordinary". Otherwise,
whatever's happening right now, I have no name for it. Zen, Void, Mind,
Seeing, Buddha, Kensho. My mouth can make many sounds.

jwiegley

And please, no surprises at the picnic. Eat when you’re hungry, sleep when
you’re tired.

jwiegley

If I were a betting man, I’d say you hit the nail square on the head.

jwiegley

It’s interesting to me that, because the story says a Zen master approved of
the basket, one might take this as a fixed point, and bend one’s self into
casuistic knots trying to find a philosophy that makes it OK to bring gas to a
fire fight, or excrement to a cookout.

Maybe the koan is messing with you, because the goal isn’t to show you
reality, but what’s keeping you from it: these mind foundations plastered on
top of the void.

# What is Zen?

I can't answer for you what Zen is, as I'm certainly not qualified. Instead,
just a word about beginnings; something anyone can do, whether they meditate
or read or follow a master:

As you look at the world, even what you call "the moment", you're mainly
seeing yourself reflected back at you: your definitions, fears, expectations.
There is very little of the world in your cognition. Becoming aware of this
tiny box that encloses your mind, and how even the words you use -- if you
push hard enough -- dissolve away into nonsense: this is where Great Doubt
takes hold. It should lead to moments of dizziness, and insecurity.

This isn't a new thing. Socrates pursued it avidly after the Oracle told him
he was the wisest man alive. From that point on, much of he did was
deconstruct people's certainties about "the world".

Books that talk about "living in the moment" aren't showing you the
mind-prison, they're gilding the bars, making the inability to distinguish
freedom from imprisonment ever harder, more subtle. In that way, it's
absolutely not helpful. Better would be to look at your anger and impatience
as you sit in traffic, and chase down its source. Do it earnestly enough, and
you might enter into a meditative state by accident, as you listen deeper and
deeper to the shape of nonsense that is now.

Prick a soap bubble with a pin, despite all its lovely colors, and what
remains? What happened to the bubble? Where did it go? If your answer to these
questions goes from "obvious", to an intriguing confusion, there will be more
to say.

# Huángbò Xīyùn: Since Mind is above all activities, so must it be with phenomena.

We're definitely clever monkeys. I think we turn to thought because it's
tractable: within our conceptual limits. This conveys a sense of security,
predictability, an ability to avert danger and achieve objectives. And it
often works well for these things, though not always.

But relied on too thoroughly, it becomes an apparition all too compelling;
like getting so emotionally wrapped up in a movie, you forget you're just
being stimulated by light.

We're waves looking for the ocean. It's not "over there", it's not "beyond",
it's not any further than the eyes we use to seek it. Giving up its form, the
wave falls into the Void, but finds that nothing changes.

jwiegley

I think we create the sense of that beyond by narrowing ourselves to thought,
rather than there actually being a “here” and “there”. It’s like hiding your
head under a blanket until removing it feels like you’ve discovered something
wondrous. Yet if you’d never done that, it would just be “things as they are”.
We seek the magical because we’ve confined ourselves to a “mundane” of our own
making. Of course we’re eager to escape! Drama is mind. :)

jwiegley

    In part, Zen is the awareness that the world of form has no real or inherent meaning...

I wonder if it goes even further than this. Your statement above seems to
posit "meaning" as an extra-natural reality, of which forms are deprived, but
something Else must necessarily possess.

However, what if meaning is not extricable from forms? For example, I often
see on reddit people posing obvious Examples of Truth, like "1 + 1 = 2". Yet
there is no meaning in this statement beyond mere definitions. Here's how it
goes:

If forall x, x = x;
If 0 = 0, 1 = S 0, 2 = S (S 0)), etc;
If forall n, 0 + n = n, and S m + n = S (m + n);
Then:

1 + 1 = 1 + 1        by meaning of =
      = S 0 + S 0    by meaning of 1
      = S (0 + S 0)  by 2nd meaning of +
      = S (S 0)      by 1st meaning of +
      = 2            by meaning of 2.

There is no "meaning" apart from the logic in which these definitions are
made. The "truth" of a statement is identified with every well-defined
application of that logic.

So I wonder if the world of forms is the world of meaning, and that meaning,
too, is mind. What we're after is what lies beyond the logic of thought, which
can never be described or assessed by it. To the mind, it is meaningless. It
is nothing more than what is.

# CLICKBAIT: A simple three-step program for how to achieve R/Zen "enlightenment" the quick and easy
way!

Your question makes me think of this quote from Black Elk Speaks:

> Afterward I learned that it was Pahuska who had led his soldiers into the
  Black Hills that summer to see what he could find. He had no right to go in
  there, because all that country was ours. Also the Wasichus [people of
  European descent] had made a treaty with Red Cloud (1868) that said it would
  be ours as long as grass should grow and water flow. Later I learned too
  that Pahuska had found there much of the yellow metal that makes the
  Wasichus crazy; and that is what made the bad trouble, just as it did
  before, when the hundred were rubbed out.

  Our people knew there was yellow metal in little chunks up there; but they
  did not bother with it, because it was not good for anything.

People treat their ideas of happiness as they do gold, not seeing that it also
defines sadness, which comes in even greater measure because of the rarity of
happiness.

Zen is the mind that wonders what this yellow metal is that drives people
crazy. It’s neither simple nor complex; it doesn’t say it has no value (since
it’s not a question of value) and it doesn’t say to avoid gold (which presumes
it has value to be avoided). It’s the original mind that sees nothing special,
and is surprised at all the to-do. Value is everywhere; value is nowhere.
What’s the difference?

# Give me some more help.

I appreciate you sharing your suffering, and asking openly about it. Chronic
nausea is so hard; it saps your will to do most anything else. When nausea
overcomes me, I use sleep to pass the time as quickly as possible. Imagining
it might not end is scary.

The Zen view? I wonder what that is. But here's a thought:

You're placing yourself in a context: "here", "now", "nauseated". You're doing
this. It locates "you" in a position that is difficult to escape from, because
you're both jailer and jailed.

Your body is averse to the situation, that's a biological fact. Any animal
will agree, that shit needs to stop. How? I don't know; there are medicines.
But you also may be magnifying your perception of it, bending the lens of
consciousness so it turns on this moment, this time, this period of suffering.

I'm sure you have more than this feeling happening. What about the rest of it?
Be more than a single point on a timeline. After all, it could still be so
much worse. See what it's not, in addition to what it is; see the end in the
beginning. If all is Mind, there is no line to draw, only the lines that come
and go.

# Zen practice as pragmatic exercise?

Since I sometimes work myself into a state over things that turn out to be
untrue (insert frog-plant here), it should be equally immersive to choose to
feel what I'd feel if I were riding a dragon right now. How is that any less
real than the reality I thought was true but wasn't?

In other words: The capacity to self-delude is really something. What's even
more remarkable is how fickle it is. Why should it be tied to what I think is
true, causing people to go to great lengths to trick themselves just to feel
the feelings that come from delusion?

# Leave Zen alone and just drop it completely. If I can do it, then you can too!

No sensor, nor sensed. It's the only thing in the room. It is the room as
experienced. Delusion creates the drama that appears to need resolution. It's
fascinating that this happens, and how the emotions are tied to it.

jwiegley

The mind is an eager reality builder. We want to know that the world outside
our door is “there” and how it feels and what it contains and what hopes and
fears it will bring. Cue the inner dialog that constantly shapes the flavor of
our life, some wanting to be the hero, others the villain.

If there suddenly was no more world outside my door, would it be different,
right now, from not looking? Schrödinger’s Frogplant.

What’s before us, prior to “placement” is the only real thing we’ll
know-not-know. And it’s always been like this, despite the emotional
rollercoaster I force myself to ride.

What I find depressing is when a person thinks this realization is the end.
That from here you just eat and sleep until death takes you. But who wakes up
only to stay in bed? That Reality is a perfect mystery to the mind is only a
start! How do we live in mystery (and this is where I think it gets mystical)
and not through definition and dialog?

# Baizhang Huaihai [749-814]: If you realize it in this moment, then you've realized it.

A good many problems arise from the mismatch between reality and our view of
it. Ending this leads to less prejudgement, more thoughtfulness, an open and
learning attitude, and recognition of others' points of view. There will still
be issues to deal with, to be sure, but instead of too much pre-planning,
encounter them as they arise.

jwiegley

    Doesn't realization or a better understanding of mind make control of the self easier, enabling
    more skillful actions within the world, or is this not Zen?

I wonder if this isn't the very opposite of what Zen is about.

When we're young, the whole world is confusing, including ourselves. We resist
this onslaught by seeking to "understand" the nature of things around us:
finding names for things, affixing labels, dividing up the world into neater
and neater compartments.

Having formed this bubble of rational endeavor, we expend enormous energy
developing its shape as life progresses. The effort to control and establish
who we think we are -- negatively or positively -- becomes an all-consuming
activity. We end up living the story that we tell ourselves, as life carries
on. Constantly mending cracks in the facade, becoming exaggeratedly sensitive
to the flaws and successes noticed by others.

I associate "Zen" with pricking this bubble, and coming to terms with the raw,
immediate mystery of life. It is a return to unknowing, and dealing with
things without the presumption of knowing them intimately. There is a humility
and directness in this, a curious wonder; such that mundanity is no longer the
enemy of the future. What is is amazing in that it is. None of us know why, no
one can point to the foundation of reality. All we can do is see it, honor it,
and cease to labor against it or impress our notions of self upon it.

If we apply the habits of Zen to build a keener, more controlled idea of self,
all we've done is convince ourselves that the prison is a resort.

To put it another way: I would hope that Zen leads away from Zen, ultimately.
If it's a finger pointing at the moon, witnessing the moon should, at some
point, leave the finger be.

It reminds me of the following from the Tao Teh Ching:

    THE ancient adepts of the Tao were subtle and
    flexible, profound and comprehensive.
    Their minds were too deep to be fathomed.

    Because they are unfathomable,
    One can only describe them vaguely by their appearance.

    Hesitant like one wading a stream in winter;
    Timid like one afraid of his neighbours on all sides;
    Cautious and courteous like a guest;
    Yielding like ice on the point of melting;
    Simple like an uncarved block;
    Hollow like a cave;
    Confused like a muddy pool;
    And yet who else could quietly and gradually evolve
    from the muddy to the clear?
    Who else could slowly but steadily move from the inert
    to the living?

    He who keeps the Tao does not want to be full.
    But precisely because he is never full,
    He can always remain like a hidden sprout,
    And does not rush to early ripening.

# What are the ways one resolves a deep anger?

The honesty here is impressive sometimes. Your words remind me of the anger
that can follow divorce; potent, long-lasting stuff.

It won’t help to say, but I believe a key may be found in “All is Mind”. Your
anger is at your view of this person, what you choose to see and focus on,
your understanding of the rightness or wrongness of their actions. Almost
certainly they see it differently, or you’d probably be less angry.

Emotions can dissipate instantly if you see things in a new light. The problem
is, such a shift can almost never be willed. We strive to change the world to
change our minds, as inefficient as that is.

So the anger is a hard reality, staring you in the face. Make it your
meditation. Find who is controlling whom, that has taken charge of your
emotions. And this other person doesn’t even have to participate! You’ve got
an effective copy of them in your mind, and the battle is ready any time.

The farce is sometimes easy to see, but the emotions remain, a fiery, out of
control burn. It’s impressive really. How we see things becomes our
experience. Becomes so real that we cease to see anything else. A gate with no
door.

# The Schism: The Northern School of Zen versus the Southern School of Zen.

Let's say you have a habit of interfacing with the world through some
conceptual framework, and oddly place yourself as a component within this
framework, even though the entirety of it arises from the same place as your
concept of identity.

Next, imagine you're trying to make someone aware (a) of the existence of this
framework, (b) of how it is used to interface with life, and (c) that it is
arbitrarily constructed.

Any work you do in the beginning will have to start out within the framework,
because there is nowhere else to start from -- unless the person is uniquely
prepared to cast it all aside at once. And whatever you do within the
framework is, in a sense, "throw away work". Really what you're doing is
peeling away and weakening concepts, and loosening the hold these conceptual
thoughts have on consciousness. Meditation, study, etc., can be tools to slow
down the hectic bustle of everyday life, and make some of these things more
apparent than they'd otherwise be.

For most people (as in, nearly everyone) this process cannot happen instantly.
When they see light that indicates to them a perception of "tree", they're
convinced that what they see is the same thing as what they understand a tree
to be. You end up having to chip away at this false edifice, weakening it,
softening them up, giving them a bitter, red pill to gnaw on until the
strangehold fades.

Yet the moment you're after is an instantaneous one: discarding the framework.
It will happen whenever the person is ready. It doesn't rely on time, or any
mental preparation. It can happen in the twinkling of an eye. The main thing,
though, is that it doesn't happen this way. Sometimes a person isn't ready to
jump into the Void, until you've given them nowhere else to go.

So to your question:

> Does enlightenment happen all at once, or does it take time through study
  and practice

I'd say: Yes.

# Baha'i and Sufi question

r/bahai
jwiegley

The Manifestation for Sufis was Muhammad. You can read a little more here:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sufism#Sufi_beliefs_about_Muhammad

There were many sages during the centuries of Sufi thought, but I don't think
even Sufis would refer to them as prophets. However, they did seek to become
manifestations of the Divine themselves, as a mirror does when fully burnished
and oriented toward the sun.

Only when the entirety of self is burned away (faná) does the Divine dwell
eternally in the heart of the believer (baqá). Compare with this Hidden Word:

> O Son of Man! If thou lovest Me, turn away from thyself; and if thou seekest
  My pleasure, regard not thine own; that thou mayest die in Me and I may
  eternally live in thee.

Sure enough, the end of this Hidden word uses these exact terms, faná and
baqá.

In fact, these paired concepts recur somewhat often in Bahá'u'lláh's mystical
writings, such as the Hidden Words (6 times) and the Seven Valleys (4 times),
even in places where their appearance is not obvious from the English
translation.

For example, in the Valley of Love he says that the seeker would prefer love's
faná to a hundred thousand baqás, so utterly has he given himself to his loved
one. This is significant because baqá (in God) should not be sought for its
own sake; the Beloved must take priority over all else, including what good
may come from His association.

# Huangbo Xiyun: And by this understanding will you awake to the truth of Zen.

    ...the way to understanding is a sudden perception that subject and object are one.

I think there's a subtlety here which, when lost, can turn such statements
into solipsism.

For example: When looking a tree, there are several aspects involved:

 1. The entity "out there", which I cannot interact with.

 2. The phenonema presented by that entity, such as reflected light.

 3. The receipt of those phenonema by my sensory organs, the eye.

 4. The interpretation of these sensations as brightness, color, form. This is
    when I start to perceive it!

 5. The mental model used to categorize and filter our interpreted sensations.
    Here I form the idea of some "entity" associated with my impressions.

 6. The ideal, of which the mental model is an approximation. This is the
    noetic "tree", for which my impression is an examples. It's a fabrication,
    but useful.

If the "subject" is the perceiver/interpreter, then the "object" is what
begins to appear in #4. Saying that "subject and object are one" is equivalent
to saying that since what I perceive are the interpretations of my mind, so
everything I perceive is, in a sense, just mind. I neither have access to, nor
experience of, anything else.

I believe the error happens when the word "object" is associated with #1.

# Huangbo Xiyun: The various means to Enlightenment are no more than showy ornaments.

I agree completely. Insight should lead to seeing that all arise from the same
source. Even if differences appear, we are like cells of one body, leaves of
one tree, or the waves of the same ocean.

To that end, seeing another person directly should cause you to feel their joy
and sorrow as your own. Even if one is free from the cycle of birth and death
(of the ever-varying self), your compassion would be keener, not less.

When some look down on others, or disregard them, I doubt their veracity. Even
when I treat your ideas of the world as so many straw dogs waiting for the
flame, your heart is as mine, beating in another chest.

jwiegley

There is the object-as-it-is, and the object-as-perceived. The second object
and the subject are one. The first is independent, which explains why “all is
One” won’t stop you from getting hit by a bus.

Zen brushes away the false reality of the object-as-perceived. Rather than
seeing ourselves as a single point of awareness within a sea of perceptions,
we come to realize we are all of that experience.

Which leaves the question: what is reality-as-it-is? No conception can answer
this question nor anything be said of it. It is the oak tree in the garden;
but don’t for a moment think that it’s the “oak tree in the garden”!

So I think there is no such thing as “accurate perception”. There can only be
direct experience. Perception is like slicing an orange: although cutting it
reveals something about the orange, no amount of cutting represents the whole
orange.

jwiegley

I see you as a spot of warmth, sometimes burning the fingers like an
intemperate flame, sometimes guiding the way, always a constant point within
the cold.

I agree that I only know of your image within my perceptions of you. Through
that image I say again, hello.

# Zen Minds Assemble! Thoughts and a question regarding a strange bit of dualism...

I would say that "mountain" is a signifier, a symbol standing for an idea.

Initially, "mountains are mountains" identifies the idea with what is referred
to. That, over there, _is_ a mountain. Just getting people to let go of this
ideational identification is supremely difficult. "What do you mean that's not
a tree? obviously it is." (Quoting a recent conversation).

When mountains are not mountains, the signifier loses existential value. Now
you don't know what the hell that thing over there is. Maybe it's a lake bed
that moved long ago.

When mountains are once again mountains the signifier has utility again, but
no reality. It just points at something, when the need today is to plan a
hiking trip.

I personally don't think Zen is mysterious or esoteric at all. What's esoteric
is how we name everything in the world, and then give those names power over
our capacity to think and see and feel. Any perceived complexity, or
difficulty, or "skill", is like a person who's made a huge knot out of a piece
of string, and then must untie it.

# Manifestation of God/Holy Spirit/Maid of Heaven Uncreated?

This is actually a fairly subtle point, as evidenced by the volume of words
you've received in response. It concerns the station of the Primal Will, and
how it came into being. The Báb writes:

> Bear thou witness ... that verily God, glorified be He, hath ever been, and
  will ever exist without anything to exist with Him. He verily hath created
  all things by virtue of His Will (Mashiyyah), and hath created the Will by
  Itself, out of nothing else.... All things are created and affected by It.

When you think of God "creating" something, it necessarily binds the created
with the Creator in a relationship where both parties are existent: first
there was one, now there are two. However, the initial "sprinkling from the
clouds of Unknowing" -- the origin of the Will -- does not follow this mundane
concept of creation, since in those terms we think of "firstness" and
"beginning", yet the Primal Will is independent of these. The Báb also writes:

> It is this Primal Will which appeareth resplendent in every Prophet and
  speaketh forth in every revealed Book. It knoweth no beginning, inasmuch as
  the First deriveth its firstness from It; and knoweth no end, for the Last
  oweth its lastness unto It.

I have no handy analogy to describe the Uncreated. Countless mystical books
will take you to the door of this thought, but remain silent thereafter. It
defies all words and concepts:

> Such is the state of the wayfarers in this Valley; but the people of the
  Valleys above this see the end and the beginning as one; nay, they see
  neither beginning nor end, and witness neither “first” nor “last.” Nay
  rather, the denizens of the undying city, who dwell in the green garden
  land, see not even “neither first nor last”; they fly from all that is
  first, and repulse all that is last. For these have passed over the worlds
  of names, and fled beyond the worlds of attributes as swift as lightning.
  Thus is it said: “Absolute Unity excludeth all attributes.” And they have
  made their dwelling-place in the shadow of the Essence.

# Why are zen sayings, koans, incredibly incomprehensible?

The words aren’t trying to communicate information, but to prompt a sudden
shift in perspective. Sometimes a question is answered in a way intended to
make the questioner realize the absurdity or narrowness of their question.

Imagine a man is standing in a river complaining of thirst and asking what he
should do. You shout out, “Sleep on it!”

To an observer without context, it may deeply puzzle them what sleeping in
this instance has to do with finding water. But if the man in the river lies
down, he’ll figure it out.

# Compati

If I may hazard a thought:

The monks were divided among themselves over a cat, just as our minds over
reality. Nansen threatened to divide the cat as well if they could not
discover a good word to save it.

Joshu knew the answer lay, neither in forcing the monks together, nor the cat
apart -- that all such approaches are absurd. The only answer is to turn the
problem inside out (or upside down), and know there are neither monks nor
cats. A sword has no power to divide what admits of no division.

Nansen fears Joshu's sword in the verse, because it would end "Nansen". Nansen
enforced the edict by showing the monks the consequence of their thinking.

# Isn't the Bible pretty clear that the resurrection of Jesus was physical, and not just spiritual?

I wouldn't say "nearly all Christians" as if it were a universally held
belief. Jehovah's Witnesses certainly don't think so; the Wikipedia page on
The Resurrection of Christ gives several accounts of scholars who question
whether it was a physical event; and if you google for Christian thought on
the idea of a spiritual resurrection, you'll find others who think so too.

The clearest verses I've seen in support of a physical resurrection are those
where Christ demonstrates his wounds to the apostles (cf. John 20:27),
inviting them to even touch them. There is this article from a man who left
the Bahá’í Faith, because he thought these verses were so compelling. Yet, it
also says that a host of saints rose up from the cemetery and visited the
nearby city, being visible to many people; why is there no corroboration for
this?

Keep in mind when thinking about these things that every religion, every
religion, has been so certain about the validity of its interpretations that
it fully rejected the Faith that came after it. The Jews did this to Christ,
and still are. It's not because these Faiths are full of uneducated people who
cannot reason; they have compelling arguments behind the certitude of their
interpretations.

If someone thinks that John 20:27 is enough evidence to disprove the divine
origin of any Faith that claims otherwise, then I cannot convince them except
to argue by history: Humanity has chronically failed to interpret scripture,
and has used the "obviousness" of literal meanings to condemn and kill its
Messengers. It should be no surprise that this continues to the present day.

For a few other Bahá’í resources on this topic, there is this article by David
Friedman; and a discussion by David Young in The Resurrection of All Mankind.
Also, the Qur'án does not support the physical resurrection, so if we are to
clarify the Bahá’í position, we must consider that too.

# Three questions

First, the word mustaqarr can mean resting place, or where a thing abides. For
example, Ismailis say that the Imam is the mustaqarr (almost in the sense of
"repository", or "seat") of God's will.

What's interesting to me is that the sun does not move in relation to the
Earth, so it is always in its resting place. Similarly, the Primal Will may be
seen to go away and come again over the ages, but in truth He has always been
"from the beginning that hath no beginning, until the end that hath no end".

Second, I do not believe Bahá’u’lláh is encouraging people to eat meat, but is
saying we should not invent our own religious restrictions, beyond what God
has made unlawful -- a behavior that has plagued many past religions.

Third is a good question! Given how suddenly that topic appears within the
letter, it's as if ‘Abdu’l-Bahá is answering a specific question, in the
context of several other questions, but we are not seeing what those questions
were.

There was a discussion thread just recently on the question of Evolution and
science.

# What does Daily meditation look like to a Baha'i?

Thanks for making it more specific! There are several places where I enter
into a state that feels meditative, of various qualities:

A favorite is taking a walk around my house for an hour, focusing on the
rhythm of a walking stick, reciting passages I've committed to memory. I try
to feel and savor the fragrance from those passages, so usually they're from
Hidden Words or the Seven Valleys. Mystical, positive subjects work well.
Reflecting on the bounty and love of God.

Some others: lying in my bed before I fall asleep, when thoughts drift;
driving in the car, just silence and pondering; when I'm bored, standing in a
line or waiting for someone. Sometimes it's worthwhile to intentionally switch
to the slower line or lane, challenging myself to reflect instead of feeling
hurried.

I usually don't involve physical aids, since I'm not a fan of pictures or
symbols. The best tools for me are silence and the memorized Word; also,
recalling challenges from the day that ruffled my feathers, to realize how
petty I was being.

# Alan Watts a modern thinker talks about the games we make out of material life.

I've always greatly enjoyed Alan Watts -- and Krishnamurti, Ayn Rand, Sartre,
and many others who, on the face of it, say things contradictory to Bahá’í
teachings about the soul and God.

However, these contradictions are often in the realm of perception: my
understanding of what they're saying vs. my understanding of the Faith. If I
make an effort to see past those differences, there are often illuminating
threads of commonality.

One of the most profound spiritual experiences of my life came after reading
Ayn Rand's "Atlas Shrugged" -- a book that very openly rails against
spiritualism -- because it caused me to see something I hadn't before, and
freed me from how I'd been reading Bahá’u’lláh's words up to that moment.
Whatever liberates the heart from the trappings of mind is worth pondering;
whatever leads the mind to cage the heart is not.

On my nightstand right now is a book from Watts: The Wisdom of Insecurity. It
has many things to say about "self forgetting", a mystery often mentioned in
the Bahá’í Writings.

# To those of you who converted to the Bahá'í Faith from another religion or lack thereof, WHY did you choose Bahá'í?

Six years after I joined the Faith, my mother did as well. She told me that
after I moved away from home, she "missed the presence of those wonderful
people". So she began her own exploration of the Writings, and declared her
belief maybe a year after. I'd describe the rest of my family as atheists,
although while not believing in "God", I wouldn't say they fully disbelieve in
any concept of spirituality.

Religious institutions, and especially formalized conceptions of "Godhood",
have done a lot of damage to the world's understanding of religion and God.
These are things every person needs to explore for themselves, and not just be
told what they mean. If you believe in the potential of human beings, and that
there is more to life than what is obvious, then I think we have a lot in
common, no matter if we agree or disagree on the surface.

# What does Daily meditation look like to a Baha'i?

I think there are many forms of meditation, depending on whom you ask and what
their aim is. As long as the fruit of it draws one nearer to God, I hope we
explore even newer forms as society progresses.

Some meditations I've found useful are: Looking for the root of how I
experience the world. Examining my emotions. Reviewing the value of my actions
during the day. Seeking to appreciate the beauty of the word of God as I
recite it. Focusing on a person, and trying to see them in terms of their
unity, not their differences. Freely roaming, almost day-dreaming, on
spiritual themes. Among others.

# To those of you who converted to the Bahá'í Faith from another religion or lack thereof, WHY did you choose Bahá'í?

Hi! For myself, I followed a progression of Christian (Methodist) to strong
atheist (very anti-religious) to agnostic ("Let's be honest, I don't know") to
the Bahá’í Faith.

I was not seeking at the time, nor interested in religion. What I did love was
philosophy, and the principle that until I can disprove something, it is
worthy of consideration. When I started talking to a Bahá’í on my college
campus, and his answers kept making more and more sense, I felt compelled to
research further.

It was several months before I was comfortable saying the word "God", or
praying, or reading the Writings of the founders of the Bahá’í Faith. I was
driven by a deep sense of its truth, more than any of the outer aspects.

Of course, I also knew that after joining, I could always unjoin, so I took my
mother's advice and became a part of the religion, while always keeping an eye
out for suspect or hypocritical behavior. It took several years before I truly
"believed", rather than constantly arguing about the correctness of the Faith
in my mind.

Now it's twenty-six years later, and the world looks very different to me.
There is a door to reality that human beings are capable of opening, and
religion is uniquely suited to unlock. Those who believe life is just the
material adventures of some clever animals, have yet to scratch the surface.

Good luck with your report!

# Heroes and virtues

Within us, each day, there is a struggle that could certainly be called
heroic. And I don't mean not eating that chocolate donut on the counter. I'm
talking about the heroism of being kind to those who annoy us, or holding to
truth even when others look down on us for doing so.

In those moments, although we are certainly not Kyrptonian, we need to be as
strong as steel, and to pierce the veils of vain imaginings with eyes of
flame! Our spirits should be free to "fly with the utmost joy and happiness
throughout the illimitable space", until we find a new way of seeing that
leads to right behavior.

> ... those personages who in a single step have passed over the world of the
  relative and the limited, and dwelt on the fair plane of the Absolute, and
  pitched their tent in the worlds of authority and command—have burned away
  these relativities with a single spark, and blotted out these words with a
  drop of dew. And they swim in the sea of the spirit, and soar in the holy
  air of light.

# Developing a very unhealthy attitude towards Islam/Muslims

As one Bahá’í to another, I'm very glad you do not simply accept your opinions
of Islam, and consider them justified based on past experiences. You clearly
want to understand and move beyond your feelings. I have other Middle Eastern
friends who feeling almost exactly the same way you do, and who have said many
of the same things to me.

I grew up a Westerner, and so my introduction and first experiences of Islam
were through Sufism. There is so much beauty there, and reveling in
contradiction! God's Will is adored because it is mysterious. It's a shame
that the beauty of Islam is lost in today's media. There is so much richness,
while certain sects have only skimmed the surface, and abused it to very harsh
ends.

I cannot deny there are things I do not understand in the Qur'an, just as
there are in the Old Testament (and in abundance). The world is not how I
would have made it. But spiritual insight does not come from comprehending
God's actions in terms we understand; we must break our minds a bit, and
tackle these problems within our hearts, so that inspiration may take the
place of limited understanding.

I'm sorry to be infuriating, but it's not enough just to tolerate Islam, or
resign it to some antiquity of history: we must become lovers of Muhammad if
we are ever to truly recognize the Ancient Beauty, Who has reappeared from age
to age, cycle after cycle. If we embrace our Friend wearing one robe, but
reject Him wearing another, what friends are we?

Anyone can love God if it were easy to do so; what glory to those who love Him
not just despite it's being hard, but because of it! In the Panj Kanz Nabil
reports Bahá’u’lláh having said:

> Dost thou know what sort of person is worthy of hearing My words and is fit
  to enter My presence? I will say it that thou shalt know. Suppose one should
  find himself in a limitless space, unbounded in every direction. To the
  right, there existeth every pomp and glory, pleasure and comfort, and
  sovereignty eternal and stainless; and to the left is prepared every
  calamity and hardship, vengeance and poverty, and vicissitude unyielding and
  perpetual. Suppose then that the Faithful Spirit should call out, from the
  precincts of the Lord of the Worlds, to that one, saying, “Shouldst thou
  choose the right—with its eternal pleasures and all that is therein—over the
  left, thou wouldst not, in the estimation of God, be abased in the least;
  and shouldst thou choose the left—with its perpetual hardships and all that
  is therein—over the right, it would not add an ounce to thy worth in the
  sight of the Almighty, the Unconstrained.” Should that one choose, at that
  moment, the left over the right—afire with ardor and zeal, and filled with
  rapture and ecstasy—then would he be fit to enter My presence and worthy of
  hearing My magnificent words.

This world, with all its confusion, is our chance to show our mettle. Be glad
that faith is not easy, because in that difficulty lies the true prize.

# Thinking about becoming (converting?) Baha'i but I want to get perspectives

It's funny you should ask this, since my beloved cousin (a Christian) is
marrying another woman next month, and this has forced me to think a lot about
these issues.

On the level of spirit, everything is about love and acceptance. We should
love each other the way God loves us -- so much so that if we meet another
soul, "... it must be as though a thirsty one with parched lips has reached to
the fountain of the Water of Life, or a lover has met his true beloved"!

At the same time, God challenges mankind to evolve, and some of the things He
asks of us, for the benefit of the whole, require sacrifice from individuals.
For example, although society upholds the individual pursuit of happiness as
an ideal, and sexual expression and identity as key components of that
happiness, the Faith only allows sex within the bonds of marriage, and then
only between a man and a woman. No matter how strongly two people may feel for
one another -- whatever their gender -- the fundamental purpose of marriage is
social, and not a way of fulfilling our own hopes and dreams, as modern
society often portrays it.

This is just one of the ways we're asked to subordinate the interests of self
to a greater purpose. The belief is that the soul has a far greater destiny
than the body, and since it is without gender and physical need, these things
should not be confounded with the meaning of happiness. Only by accepting the
counsels of the Manifestation of God for each age does true civilization
emerge, and then only do we properly glimpse why human beings were made to be.

# Mumon's poem about his experience

I think that just as there can be over-intellectualization in Zen study, there
can also be under-intellectualization.

I'm not qualified to tell you what Mumon thought, or felt -- and what follows
is probably not found in the words of Zen masters. I offer it only as more
food for thought.

Looking at the context of the story: Mumon did not "just hear the lunchtime
drum" and gain enlightenment. He had been working diligently, for six years,
on the "mu" koan up to this point. So, on this day, what he heard was roughly
the 2000th lunchtime drum, after painstaking deliberation. His mind was ripe,
and I'm guessing he'd thought a fair bit about the drum's role in his life up
to that point.

A drum alone is neither good nor evil: just a percussive sound. But a
lunchtime drum carries additional meaning based on the use we make of it:
signaling lunch. To a monk slaving away at a koan for six years, it might have
also come to mean other things:

  - the promise of satisfaction of hunger and physical emptiness;
  - a break from the tedium of sitting;
  - a time to be around the noise of others for a moment, before going back to
    silence;
  - etc.

In other words, "drum" becomes "lunchtime drum" becomes "lunchtime drum
colored by experience". I imagine that, after six years, the lunchtime drum
was a significant moment within the day, with quite an effect on
consciousness. Especially since there was so little else going on that could
have a similar effect, as it was connected to a deep, physical motivation
(hunger).

So maybe, just maybe, when the drum sounded, Mumon realized his true self had
become "Mumon" in the same way the drum had turned into a "lunchtime" drum;
and all the extra meaning imbued in that drum was like the layers on top of
"Mumon". "mu" wipes it all away, down to the nature underneath, "the original
Face".

# I have a hard time believing in the God I was raised to believe

I think many of us are taught to view God as a power player in what is
principally a human drama -- something that makes little sense, if you think
about it. Why would God develop feelings of antipathy toward us just because
we're weak and ignorant and always still learning? Faith isn't obvious: it can
take a lifetime to develop, and *not* having faith is even sometimes part of
that journey (e.g., the Apostle Paul himself).

I wouldn't worry so much about what you've done, or what you think God will do
in response. He's a better friend/parent/confidant than we can ever give Him
credit for. Instead, focus on your own heart, and whether it is sincere and
pure. I'm not even talking about a need to believe right now. Just purify and
cleanse your heart as best you can, and find out from there what will move you
along on your journey.

As for the Old Testament God: Much of the Hebrew bible does not quote a
Prophet giving revelation that such and such a thing happened. What we know is
only what has come down to us as stories in these books.

For example, the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah: let's assume the cities
existed, that they were destroyed, and that the people who lived in them were
as morally corrupt as the Bible says. Now some natural disaster occurs that
seems like a freak occurrence, as we know does happen. It's easy to imagine
that the God-fearing people of the time, seeing the immorality of those
Sodomites, would believe their destruction was a just retribution. They would
say "it was from God", and really who would argue with that? Even today we
might say the same thing, if a particularly evil person gets his comeuppance
through a freak event, an "act of God".

It's therefore highly likely that, as a record of the times and a striking
moral example, it would be written down for future generations to observe and
reflect on. This doesn't necessarily mean this was Revelation, though, or that
it accurately portrays what God was thinking and feeling.

Different readers of the Bible will have different interpretations, of course,
and some who hold to the entire Bible as the infallible Word of God will think
it means exactly what it says. But perhaps the point of the Torah here, being
divinely inspired, was to provide the spiritual lessons humanity needed to
move forward in their progress as a nation. That is: *these are human focused
stories*, meant to educate us along the Right Path, rather than accurate
indicators of the personality of an Infinite and Unknowable Being, by Whose
Own Revelation in the later words of Christ is all goodness, love and mercy.

# Good and Evil at the End

I wonder if an analogy might apply: While our bodies are developing in the
womb, it's possible for some parts to develop poorly, just as others do well.
Then we have to live out this life with those weaknesses and strengths. In
that sense, some parts of our body afterward might be described as physically
heavenly, and others as hellish.

I know many religions are boolean in their view of heaven and hell: either
you're in one or the other. But perhaps the degree of virtue we achieve in
this life is like developing a healthy soul, which is able to thrive in
another world intended for its nature. We may even be able to keep developing
once this life is past, but just like development here: however much we can
still accomplish amazing things, whether deaf or disabled or blind, we can't
change what we start with after the developmental stage is done.

# Questions about belief

To offer another perspective: I know the Bahá’í Faith is a religion, and often
understood as a religion: A unified system of beliefs and practices, a common
core of scripture and fellowship, and a mission to serve the world driven by a
guiding organization.

However, on the mystical side of things it's foremost a connection to the
Manifestation of God, a Being Who is ultimately a Perfect Mystery. We may ask
ourselves whether the laws of the Faith make sense, or if we agree with them,
or what their purpose might be; but in the end, the only thing we really know
is that Bahá’u’lláh asked us to follow them.

I think about this when I say the Greatest Name 95 times a night, because when
it comes down to it, what do we have to offer God, Who is absolutely infinite
in every respect? What we can do, He can do better; we don't know anything
unknown to Him; and what we call excellence, in thought or deed, are to Him
the ways of children.

Yet, He's asked us for these things. Not because He needs them, yet He asked.
In a way, it sort of doesn't matter what's been asked -- just by asking, He's
given us an opportunity to know something He wants!

Most of the time I don't know why, and my explanations are shallow compared to
the mysteries of Revelation. If sometimes it's OK to eat pork, and other times
not, how will I ever know the reason behind it?

I bring this up because, while it's perfectly OK for you to choose your own
beliefs -- this is our essential freedom -- consider what it means. It's not
about what makes sense, or what you agree with, or what has a meaningful
outcome. You've been asked. If you believe in the Person of Bahá’u’lláh, and
Whom He represents: you've been asked.

# Robes, and Buddhist virtue signalling

I've noticed this pattern too, in quite general contexts. For example, when
someone describes a movie/song/cuisine/place they like, and you get a sense
that what they like most is the thought of being the sort of person who would
like that thing. I.e., who they are vs. who they want to see themselves to be.

People "take on robes" in this sense not just religiously, but when it comes
to exercise, vegetarianism, a new author, language, art, etc. They become
evangelicals because they've "found themselves", along with a sudden surge of
energy, freedom, awareness, creativity. Freed from the prison of some old
self, the new self appears as a boundless adventure.

But perhaps the only real "putting on of robes" must be a shedding of old
ones: To discover what you like, even if at first you don't like that you like
it; to see the complete foolishness of one's life so far, without a wise
replacement; to feel cut off and adrift, because you really are in uncharted
new territory.

I've often been critical when tasting the saccharin sweetness of such beliefs.
It's why I disliked hipsters so much: sheep following the cult of "unique
individualism", trying so hard to avoid the appearance of trying. In the end,
such critiques are but an effort to smash the mirror of reality, to not see my
own tattered "robes" gathering around me.

Real truth remains such a baffling mystery that when we finally seek to escape
the chaos, our surrogate self is necessarily just a puppet, wrapped over a
spasming hand.

# Is "design" a self-evident aspect of the universe?

Even as a theist, who agrees with the design argument, I don't find it meets
the standards of inarguable proof.

Science currently has reason to believe that universal contraction and
expansion have been ongoing for an unknown amount of time. Consider the sheer
variety of the universe: statistics alone means there is a lot, and I mean a
whole lot, of exploration of possibilities going on. Basically, whatever can
happen, will happen.

We observe what we observe. The fact we're observing it doesn't make it
special, just that we exist in one of those rare statistical outcomes where
such observation can occur. We see what we see because it's there to be seen.

This is basically the million monkeys argument: Give a million monkeys
typewriters and unlimited time, and they will eventually reproduce all the
written works of humanity. This doesn't make a single one of them an author.

Now you could ask, "Who created the matrix of possibility itself, from which
all this variety arises?" In the case of the monkeys, it's whoever gave them
the typewriters; in the case of the universe...?

...

> But I fall back to atheism when I realize there's no reason to believe why a
> God would do such a thing. There's nothing to influence God to do anything
> if nothing exists at all...

Maybe another thing to question is: what is existence? Is it the physical
objects we see around, whose seeming permanence depends entirely on time? I
too would wonder why an infinite God would bother investing His attention in
something so transient.

But perhaps real existence, what religion is calling us to recognize and
engage with, is something other: like a flower growing in the dirt, it
requires this morass of ignorance and blindness for the truth to become
obvious. Perhaps what God has done is subtle, befitting His reality, and it is
the journey of the soul to ultimately experience the joy of appreciating it.
And perhaps this was done from love, and no other reason.
