---
title: Untitled 10
tags: journal
---

The place that I am staying is quite lovely.  Because I am staying for
40 days, more or less, they gave me a nice rate of about $65/night.  It
would have been much cheaper to rent an apartment, but less desirable.
All of the cheaper apartments are really just a room shared with other
people.  I couldn't find any "single" apartments within the time-frame I
wanted.

This hotel is in a huge mansion, and my room is down at the bottom
floor, the only room on that level, in fact.  So at night it is
completely quiet, and I can hear nothing -- which is quite a change from
everywhere else I've been.  It is large, with a double bed, and lots of
hardwood furniture.  And it has a fan, thank goodness.

The bathroom, though, is perhaps my favorite part.  With white walls and
blue tile, it has a large window that opens on a private garden in the
back, so that when I shower I feel as though I am staying as a guest in
a large chateau on the Italian foothills.  I hear only the birds, the
winds that blows through the windows, and the water pressure is lovely.
I do not think I could have imagined better!

When I leave each day, I walk past the Boboli Gardens, and cross the
Ponte Vecchio on my way to the city center.  I think of you each time I
walk across, knowing that your spirit has visited there often.  Then I
pass, go north a little ways, and have a cappuccino in the Piazza della
Republica, one of my most frequented areas.  There is a nice fountain
there, the post office, a bank, and a movie theater.  The other night I
watched "2 Fast 2 Furious" in Italian.  Well, movies about car racing do
not need words, is all I can say.


