---
id: 319
title: Untitled 6
date: Mon, 23 Jun 2003 12:00:00 +0000
category: Journal
---

As to why the right-wing likes Rand, I think it is due to a
misapprehension of her words.  Rand never clarifies the distinction
between "the individual as symbolizing humanity" and "the individual as
an instance of humanity".  Or rather, she does clarify it, over and over
again, but the point is so basic that it's easily missed.

To me her philosophy says one, fundamental thing, the reiteration of
which has affected me profoundly: You are human, and you have a
responsibility only to yourself for your actions and their result: so
act, and make yourself and everyone proud of what we can do.

I think this is what God wants also: For us to worship Him as the
Creator, which in Rand's terms means not words, but by using the
capacities we've been given.  It is Human that deserves awe and wonder
and admiration.  John Wiegley is but one incarnation of Human, and while
he may possess different capacities, it is no more or less beautiful
should he choose to act than if another does.  There can be only one
success: our success.

This issue of responsibility is tricky, too.  We are responsible FOR
everything, but only TO ourselves.  Others' egos want us to be
responsible FOR ourselves TO them.  In that kind of world, people do not
act because they are bound by what others will think of them.

This all reminds me of the man who finished one of the bridges around
New York.  Was is the Brooklyn bridge?  Anyway, he had a vision, and
partway through construction he had a terrible accident that left him
completely paralyzed.  He was forced to use eye-blinks to communicate
his intentions to his wife.  Well, it took him seventeen years, but
using those eye-blinks he completed the bridge.

When I hear that story, I feel proud of myself -- meaning, the reality
of my creation, rather than just John Wiegley -- because the will he had
to surmount any barrier is the will that God has given me too, should I
choose to apply it.  I *love* to hear stories of human triumph now, and
see our acts of greatness; because the very same Spirit has made them
all possible, and God has invited you and me to participate in the life
of that spirit.

The right-wing believes that the individual somehow can relate to this
spirit exclusively, and that others are not worthy of attention.  In
Rand's terms, their egos do not deserve attention, but their potential
does.  Once the idea of exclusivity appears, then follows superiority,
then follows the "superman" ideas of Nietzsche and other purist
philosophies.

Whereas in fact we are one whole.  The creation is one whole: designed
for the single purpose of manifesting the glory of the Divine.  And of
all things, humans can do this best.  Why else have the Prophets always
been sent to us in the form of human beings?


