---
title: Untitled 7
date: Tue, 24 Jun 2003 12:00:00 +0000
category: Journal
---

If I love your potential, it is because I love our potential.  As we are
different, I expect that potential to manifest in different ways.  Since
only you know yourself, I expect only you to know how that potential may
be made manifest.  What I am loving about you is that this potential
exists, and that if you choose to pursue it, I will witness a
Quality-with-the-flavor-of-Doris in the world that was lacking before.
As I have already witnessed, and hence our continuing relationship.

But I love this beauty because it is Quality, not because it is Doris.
If I gave you a broken lamp during an endless night, you would throw it
away.  But if I told you to honor and love that lamp, and help it to
find a socket, you would later understand what a gorgeous thing it is.

We all have the same raison d'etre: To know and worship God.  But since
this must come from the individual (again, the importance of the
individual), it is always between you and God.  One cannot diminish the
importance of the individual, since no action is possible that does not
begin with the individual's choice to act.  Acting in harmony is another
choice, but no matter how wonderful the group, it will never be able to
replace the individual's contribution to it.

Sometimes when people say "it is between you and God" it is because they
do not have an answer to your question.  The Bahá'í Faith seems
contradictory even to Bahá'ís.  This is because it addresses the
question of life at a deeper level than we are used to seeing it.  The
discovery of the reason behind such contradictions is what occurs with
time and thought.

Ask a Bahá'í sometime if it is true that we should be anxiously
concerned with the needs and exigencies of the present day.  Then ask
them to explain why Bahá'u'lláh says: "Waste not thy precious life in
employment with this swiftly passing world." (from the Seven Valleys).
Get them to explain that!  You should find that we don't have better
answers.  It is Bahá'u'lláh's excellence that grounds our Faith, not the
excellence of our own understanding.


