---
title: The Way
tags: journal
---

Based on a conversation I had with my good friend Sina about "The Last
Samurai":

There is a way of acting that involves the doer so utterly he becomes
the action itself.  The Sufis called this "faná": the state of the lover
who is consumed by his Loved One's beauty.

One who achieved this was the Japanese warrior-saint, Miyamoto Musashi.
He achieved such skill with his sword that he refused to fight using
real blades -- then refused to engage opponents at all.  He retired to
the mountains and contemplated the mystery behind his skill, and what
had allowed him to reach such a degree of perfection.  He took on pupils
and tried to teach them what he called "the Way" -- which he claimed was
equally applicable to all aspects of life.  A letter he wrote to one of
these pupils is found in the book, "The Way of the Five Rings".

What was this Way he had found?  I cannot say, but I relate his thoughts
to two experiences of my life: programming and poetry.  If I can
understand these, perhaps I can make sense of what Musashi had found.

The Way as I know it, then, is marked by a rightness that defies
expression in words.  It just feels like the way life should be, as if
everything were fitted to its place and there were a "singing" quality
to the arrangement.  An ecstatic, pure joy goes along with this state.
And whenever this point is reached, there is no need to go further.
That one does go further -- to complete the poem or finish the program
-- is a consequence of time spent in that state.  But the state itself
is its own fulfillment: its own reason for starting the activity.

This rightness identifies a moral truth associated with the Way.  It is
a Way of what is good and right.  For example, if a house feels like
home and is well arranged, it is a good house; if a tree bears
bountiful, delicious fruit, it is a good tree.  The Way guides human
action to such good results -- achievements that radiate quality and
provoke humble admiration.

This "good", however, is not a prescribed good.  The Way is not the same
as the laws of any particular path along the Way.  For instance, there
may be rules of grammar for writing a beautiful poem, but grammar does
imply beauty.  The good is something alive, attracted by the spirit of
the person who pursues it.  If that soul touches the good, and brings it
to being by honoring its moral needs (as if a bird seeking a well-built
nest), there is joy in such production more satisfying than what is
produced.

In the case of poetry, one sits down to write a poem.  There is much to
be learned before starting, such as vocabulary, metaphor, alliteration,
rhyme.  All these arts should be taught to the poet, so he has a wide
pallet to choose from.  Then he sets down his pen.  By listening to his
soul, an inspiration comes; he feels the inchoate beauty of this spirit,
and desires to honor it through expression.  This is when he uses his
sense of rightness -- the Way -- to guide the application of form to the
essence his heart has experienced.  If he be true to his spirit, and
honor the requirements of good poetry, he can produce something great
and attain private heights of grandeur by such creation.  Poetry is but
a medium for communing with that spirit; it is the Way of the poet to
lose himself in the Beauty he knows through poetry.

What is good poetry, however, has nothing to do with what is judged to
be good.  It is good if it fulfills the Way, which means that it is
*good*.  That is, good in the sense of being better; good like a cool
breeze on a hot day, good like food after hunger, good like the sun as
its touches the horizon on a clear day.  This quality of rightness
cannot be defined or taught, but is intimately familiar to every human
being.  We instinctively orient our lives toward the discovery of such
good -- even if we pursue it by following what is said to be good,
rather than the quality of goodness itself.

Since what is good is most desirable, purity of desire is the only thing
needed to find it.  When this purity is reached, what is good can be
*seen*.  It defies words, yet is more obvious than words.  It is this
rightness the Way seeks to bring into being; it is the joy of such an
act that thrills the soul and makes life seem inexhaustibly rich.

All that's been said above can be applied to living itself: which is the
highest expression of the Way.  As with a particular art-form, life has
its own moral truth that allows for a good life.  If a good house is one
worth living in, a good life is the same.  Its success is evidenced by
happiness.  And in the moment, there is that same, fiery joy experienced
when doing anything after the manner of the Way.

Without morality -- in any endeavor -- life is fundamentally broken,
however attractive it may appear in other respects.  In the same way, a
blade without moral strength suffers a flaw soon to break, or a line of
poetry insensibly detracts from the beauty of the whole.  Sensitivity to
the connection between morality and rightness requires chastity of soul,
and freedom of spirit, otherwise it is too easy to believe that what is
attractive is also good.

Religion has often called the Way of living rightly, "The Straight
Path", and has associated this Path with happiness, joy, and with a road
that leads ultimately to God.  This implies that the morality taught by
the Messengers of God -- if it comes from God -- describes the moral
truths needed to live a good life.  Yet they are still only laws; if
conjoined with the living joy that comes from intimacy with the Spirit
being sought -- then the consequences of morality are its own fruit, and
this is that spirit of the Way described earlier.

> In all these journeys the traveler must stray not the breadth of a
> hair from the "Law," for this is indeed the secret of the "Path" and
> the fruit of the Tree of "Truth"...

If this is so, it sheds new light on the importance of the Law, because
no sooner would a forger allow the least impurity to corrupt his steel,
than an individual would commit an action detracting from the Way of his
life.  For the Way is not the act, but the spirit of the action.  If the
action is not as pure as the intent that began it, how can it achieve
perfection?  If the Way lives through the joy of such acting, moral
corruption is equal to death.  I would compare the good to an ethereal
spirit, which humans are capable of attracting to the world; but if our
actions do not honor its goodness by rectitude, it will flee and have
nothing to do with us.

In sum, the Way is known when acting is such joy as to forget the
details of acting.  It is the secret of life, the doorway to the inner
land.  Those who have been there understand it, while everyone can
recognize it instantly.  It recalls one to the joys of youth, when
living was unconscious and the rightness of the day was like sunlight
compared to shadow.  Only later, when we acquired skills and the need to
judge whether we were doing well or not, did assessment take the place
of immediate knowing, and definition the place of what has always been
indefinable, but is the very soul of reality.


