---
title: Fashion
tags: poetry
---

    People dress up their figures
      to be stylish
    their words
      to be proper
    their thoughts
      to be clever
    their hair
      to be pretty
    their minds
      to be accepted
    their hearts
      never to be hurt.

    Until today
    I've always thought
    the effort to make my words pretty
    was motivated by something artistic.

    When really the motive is no different
    than the little voice which says:
    "An Armani suit is better than a flannel shirt."

    Fashion, or the inherited conceptions of people
    reconfigured so as to appear new,
    has been the driving force of my life,
    whether positively as a supporter
    or negatively as a rebel.

    But I don't accept one word of it.
    Nor do I accept the casuistry
      called arguments
    which people use to defend their various modes
    of fashion or opinion.

    It is all pure rubbish
    and stale
    whose defenders use words
    cooked in the very same pot as their beliefs.

    Now consider this:
    It doesn't matter what you look like
    so long as it reflects the dignity of your nature;
    it doesn't matter what you sound like
    so long as it's the voice of your own heart;
    and it doesn't matter what you think
    so long as the thoughts are your own.

    The rest is garbage, an don't let them tell you otherwise.
    If the above philosophy renders me ugly and misunderstood: oh well.
    Those words come from *their* vocabulary, anyway.


