---
title: Climb
tags: stories
---

In the German city of Cologne there is a very tall, old and famous
church named the Dom Kirsche.  On one side, in a tall spire that reaches
all the way to heaven it seems, there is a circular staircase with many
hundreds of steps leading to the top.  I remember someone said that
there was a similar staircase in the twin spire next to it, but it was
closed for renovation that year.

The artwork of this church is very Gothic, having sharp angles, much
stained glass, and enormous inner spaces where the faithful can pray.
Sometimes it seems a bit dark to me, but there is certainly a sacrosanct
air to the place.  If it weren't a church, I don't know what they'd make
of it.

One thursday in April it was especially drizzly, and I decided to walk
up the stairs to get beyond the reach of the weather's malaise.  Up at
least four-hundred steps (I stopped counting), to see a view of the
pretty German city.  Being American, it's hard to relate to the age of
German cities.  Whereas I think of the seventeeth century as being quite
a long time ago, Cologne could rightly measure it's age as a multiple of
American governmental lifetimes.  In fact, I think Cologne is as old as
my own county times five, at least.  The Dom Kirsche itself predates the
Revolution, and yet it's hard to imagine in my racial consciousness that
nothing of my present country existed when that first step was built.

Blithely then I put my foot down and began the journey.  Physical
endurance is not my strong suite, and this climb was going to take its
toll, but the strength of one's will can often make up for natural
deficiencies

I marked the time of my beginning by the position of the sun.  It was
hiding behind a cloud, but visible by the bright stain it made on the
dreary canopy.  That would make it about four o'clock, with four more
hours until sunset.

The first fifty steps fill one with a false sense of well-being.  The
problem is that it cannot all be tackled in one go.  Each step is not
that much effort: just lifting the foot about eight inches upward.  Then
again, and again -- and again.  By the fifty-first step you are
committed, but only now has the reality of the task dawned on you.
Seven more sets of fifty left to go!  If it were presented as a single
leap, the proportions of that leap would stop nearly everyone from
trying, but because of the deceptiveness of the first easy step,
countless travelers plunge themselves into that feat of quite some
magnitude.

By the two-hundredth step, I met her.  She was blonde, and had a
blonde's smile which was warm with something like sunshine from within.
This attracted me to her right away, and as I noticed the beauty of her
figure I was quite taken.  Fortunately she had just dropped something on
her way down (an earring I think it was), and I was able to introduce
myself by way of helping her.

She thanked me and was going to continue downward, when I asked her
suddenly if she would accompany me to the top.

Now, there are some people who say that if a woman withstands your
getting sick on the first date, or doing something else equally
terrible, she's a "keeper".  This was on that level of magnitude.  I
don't know why she agreed, and it still seems to me quite impossible
that she did.  But I asked, and she responded yes.  So up she went, with
me ahead and her following.

Every few steps I would turn back to ask her about simple details --
mostly because the narrowness of the steps required concentration.  Her
name was Monica; she was actually Belgian, living in London; her family
had brought her here many years ago as a child, and she was coming back
for a nostalgia trip.  She was a student at Oxford, enjoyed sports and
actually did not find the stair-climb too tiring.

I in turn told her that I was studying Philosophy in America, had lived
all my life in America in various states, and found the climb extremely
tiring.

She was younger than I by a few years, and liked hearing about American
life.  It is fun to be an instant celebrity because of one's
citizenship.  She wanted to know about American universities, sports,
and what kinds of things we do for recreation.  This made the
conversation very easy, without the dreadful pauses that can kill any
possibility of going further.  We were able to fill up the whole climb
with empty, though informative, discussion about the particular of
everyday life.

In actuality I very much dislike talking about trivial things.  New love
interests, however, have a way of making everything tedious seem
interesting.  Whereas normally I would have responded with a serious of
one or two word answers, now I became a fount of information about
American society.

Monica also shared a lot with me about her life in England: her move
there, the things she did to keep herself interested.  It was nice, but
I didn't really listen to much of it.  That's the other strange thing
about new love interests.  I love to hear them and watch them talk, but
I don't listen very much -- at least not while we're at the trivial
stage.  It's later on that things deepen.

Depending on the woman, I can see this in her eyes too.  She's not
really listening either.  In fact, we both recognize and acknowledge the
fact that we're engaging in banter for the sake of paving the way for
something else.  That something else can't start the conversation; some
unwritten convention does not allow it.  First there has to be a
friendly negotiation of barriers, before the tone can change.  And when
it does change, it can do so so radically as to eliminate the need for
spoken communication at all.  This is what I wait for: the immediately
contact of enraptured souls.  That time when her presence becomes like
food, and I can drink her in through my thirsty eyes.  But meanwhile I
patiently wait for the banter to end.  I remember all of it -- my memory
is good about such things -- but this is not the stuff of life.  People
have so much more to offer, which can only be found once we dispense
with the need to entertain one another.

As an option, entertaining one another is fun, playful; but when it is
necessary during the interpersonal negotiation period, it lacks
frivolity.  She understood this too, I could tell.  Her eyes told me,
and I let her know through my eyes.  Once the eyes share a common
understanding, everything is certain to go well.

We cleared the top of the stairs and moved aside to rest against the
wall.  With her eight hundred steps (up once, down half, and back up
again), she was about as tired as I was.  We sat down on the cement
floor with our backs against the wall and watched the other people catch
their breath as they moved through the room.  From this room it
connected to another that was under construction, where the bell tower
is.  Not much else was up here, so I imagine people come up for the
climb as much as for the view of the city.

In the ceiling were spaces where I could see the gray of the sky again.
Monica looked up too.

"The sky is often gray in London," she said.  I turned to watch her face
as she watched the sky.  She was beautiful.  Until then we had only seen
each other's eyes in brief glimpses during the climb.  Enough to
communicate meaning, but not sufficient for study.  Hers were glacial
blue, but not cold.  They had a marbled texture in the pupil, with
wondering black centers which made me want to stare at those eyes for as
long as possible.  Then I saw her neck muscles start to turn, so I
quickly averted my eyes so as to prolong that moment until a better
time.

"What is it like in California at night?" she asked.  The delicate
uncommonness of the question carried a subtext which was designed to
open the way to me for the next move.  In a way these games can be the
most satisfying form of human parley.  There is an understood formalism
to the speech which one can use (and where we all learn this, I do not
know), but the whole meaning of the conversation is communicated through
highly subtle shifts of meaning, or forms of expression.  Asking what it
is like in California says nothing, but simply adding "at night" makes
the question uncommon enough for the intent to be clear.  That is, not
that it has anything to do with nocturnal activity, but I am now being
given the OK to answer with an equally uncommon response.  Before this
permission is granted, anything uncommon sounds forward; but once the
door is opened, I'm welcomed to step in.


