---
title: Flight
tags: stories
---

The car pulled up alongside an empty field, empty but for summer grasses
and glowing marigolds.  A soft light seemed to pour from the Arcadian
setting.  It was not long until twilight.  The woman in the car turned
off her engine.

Opening the car door, she heard the faintly strident beeping of the "key
in ignition" warning.  The sound intruded the peaceful quiet.  She
slammed the door in distaste of all warnings.  Society seeks our own
protection, from ourselves, but we want freedom-a freedom of soul.  Even
here the city would remind her against locking herself outside the car.
The thought offended her.

Leaving the metal thing behind, she turned to observe a hill on the
other side of the field.  It rose up quickly, then dropped, leaving the
impression that there was much to be discovered on the other side.  To
the left, the marigolds were nestled in a backdrop of baby blue-bells
and daisies.  Summer was fresh in the valley, still warm and moist; not
yet the barren harshness of the later months.  Until then, the tender
flowers would exult in the gentler rays of their mother sun.  There was
no sign of death yet in the valley.

But a death imagined can become a death realized.  She thought with
disgust of the building contractors, the real estate companies-in a
word, the "city-growers": people who wanted to carry the ugly humanity
of their city everywhere.  They would be the harsh season that never
ended-unlike the chastisements of nature which are always followed by a
gentle reprieve.

She reached down to cradle a young, blue-green flower.  Its petals
responded to the touch in ripples of downy silk.  There was color, the
reflected sun-beams, and the soft, waving music of the grasses.  From
the west a cool breeze embraced her, and she turned to see the luxuriant
sun settling into his bed of clouds.  And looking at virginity of the
field-free of bottles and wrappers-she threw off her shoes and sent them
flying toward the car.  The THUD against the exterior pleased her
tremendously.  It was like declaring one's freedom.

She broke into a run, with the grasses whipping at her eager legs as she
chased the image of the hill.  Beneath her, the timid eyes of the
squirrels and rabbits and lizards wondered at who this stranger might
be.  But she did not see them, nor could they see the free spirit that
was now incarnate in her.  Above, the clouds seemed so far out of reach,
but they were under her feet as her spirit soared.

The sun beheld it all in his sleepy vision, pleased at the creatures he
had given life to.  She was becoming the focus, not the city or its
cacophony, and all the grandeur of nature delighted in her joy.  To be
appreciated was their greatest hope: the sun, these clouds, and the
gentle grasses.  And hers was the destiny to appreciate; a unique
capacity given only to man.

Now the wind was a rush, but her breathing still calm and stable.  The
speed welcomed her and drew her in, coaxing her spirit to become more
and more manifest in its quick movements.  Speed!  Speed!  She seemed to
shed the burden of her physical self, leaping through a magic hoop to
become an element of air.  The summer creatures were caught in a swoon,
somehow intangibly affected by the passion of this woman and her escape.
Her feet tapped the ground lighter and lighter, becoming mere caresses,
then suggestions, then faint memories.  Finally, there was no longer the
sound of feet.  It was an impossible memory, a passion too great to be
lived, a yearning that was more fairy tale than a possibility in "real
life".

And so the wondering creatures remembered it, the squirrels and the
lizards, watching amusedly as the policemen arrived with the worrying
husband.  The men pondered at the car and the shoes, and spoke in their
strange city-sounds which the creatures could not understand.  Nor could
they understand the motives of the men, or their actions, nor comprehend
why there was not the same joy in them as they had felt from the woman.
Only the scratching of heads and more strange sounds, and that oft
repeated sound which none of them could understand, nor would they have
even if they had known the city-speakers lingo: "she's missing".  While
the sound they might have uttered, if asked, would have sounded much
more like "she is free".


