---
title: Julia
category: Stories
---

It was late afternoon, with a fiery sun setting behind gentle, rolling
hills, when I finally got my friend, General Herbert Wilcox, to open up
with a story that I never expected.  He's a reserved man, not generally
a braggart or a whiner.  Life just dishes him whatever, and he gobbles
it up.

With a such a man -- one who hasn't a need to prove himself -- you often
find a conspicuous lack of adventure.  This was, to my knowledge back
then, a good description of the man.  He was steady in most things.  His
even keel was a boon to his men, since he never got upset, and kept his
cool in battle.  But there was something missing.  Something you
normally find in the usual military man.  "Where was his gusto?", I'd
think to myself.  You'd thought the Army meant as much to him as his
scrambled eggs in the morning.

Well, believe you me, I was in for a surprise that day.  We'd just
finished lunch, and the serving maid was clearing up the picnic table.
My, nothing is quite so fine as a late noon, a pluck of pheasant, and a
pretty woman to tidy up afterwards.  Men never care for order much.  War
is more our taste: about as much disorder as a man can handle.

Now, it's a happy coincidence there was a pretty lady with us that day.
It made the story much more real than it otherwise would have been.

But I'm getting ahead of myself, I apologize.  Let me go into the story
the way he did.  If my story-telling is anything like his, you'll know
exactly what I'm talking about.

It was three weeks before his wedding to Ms. Julia Delacroix.  Rumor has
it she was the finest woman in all of Louisiana.  I wouldn't know,
however.  My bias has always been Texan.

The two had been seeing each other about two years.  She was from a
straight-backed Catholic family, and he from a an ex-Jesuit father, and
Baptist mother.  There was religion in both families, but not to much in
Herbert.  Something nearer to the ground commanded him in those days.

Though, when a woman is not yet wed she wields a terrible force.  It's
enough to pull a man to his knees -- like magnetizing the earth until
his burning fire drops him to the ground in utter submission.  There's
something quite unfair here.  Without this, I wonder what female-kind
would do.

For me, the compromise was always too great.  Perhaps my relish is too
well spread on other things.  But Herbert -- maybe now I understand the
wherefore of his calm attitude.

Ms. Delacroix, being of the religious mind that she was, enforced a
celibate diet on my poor friend.  Yet this did not go unpunished after
the ceremony.  There was much doubt in Ms. Delacroix's mind as to what
she'd gotten herself into.  However, they settled down to a fine state
of affairs, and raised four happy children in a grand estate.  She
having come from old money, there was never hunger or despair in the
house.  This buffeted for a while the compromises she was forced to
make.

Yet our story has nothing to do with the "happy years," but rather that
one night three weeks before the wedding.  It was cloudless, and a
full-moon high in the sky.  The wind whispered on the ivy outside the
Delacroix home.  She lived on the second story, across the hall from an
empty guest room.

Herbert thought long and hard before committing to his plans that night.
The faint chill in the air only exaggerated his nerves as he stood on
the Delacroix's property line.  For him, it was an enemy line, the enemy
being a vague madness that propelled him beyond all reason.  Herbert
reigned in with all his might, but the chargers were spurred on.  He
stepped onto the gravel garden path.

It was fall then, and the nights were cool.  Summer was unfriendly to
Julia's hair, so it would be an autumn wedding.  Only three weeks to go.
Herbert kept reminding himself, debating inside, using all of his male
persuasion to turn him back, but female persuasion is damnably
effective.

One foot followed the other, each eager to see what lay at the trip's
end.  The tender grass bent easily under his nervous step.  One foot,
two feet -- and the mansion rose before him like a palace in a forgotten
wood.  All of him thrilled at the silent windows, the peaceful sleepy
cottage standing nearby.  All was dark, and nothing stirred.

In his mind crickets echoed with the beating of his heart, and like an
mad rush he fought to lose his will just as hard as he did to regain it.
I mustn't -- you must!  And all the while he feet ignored him, and
continued on their steady way.

Just before the guest room was a mighty oak tree, branches outspread in
the moonlight.  It was an easy climb up to the second story window.  Too
easy.

Before he could catch his breath again he was inside.  In a small
country town there isn't much fear of burglars.  If a man is determined,
they figure, what will a lock do?  At least the second story and up was
unlocked.  The first story was snug and secure.

Mr. and Mrs. Delacroix bedded on the third floor, above the library on
the other side of the house.  No danger of disturbing them, he thought.
Now his thoughts had only one aim.

He slipped into the hallway, and caught he foot on a throw rug.  He was
able to catch himself, though.  Lucky thing.  If Julia's parents had
found an eager boy stalking their halls, hell would have opened up to
swallow everybody.  But the house was dead with silence.  Somewhere, it
seemed, the house itself breathed, alive with the history of ten
generations.  Would he be willed to defame those honorable souls, in
this very house of their ancestors?  Fortunately for Herbert, such
thoughts were long behind, milling about in the guest room, chatting
amongst themselves.  He proceeded step after step, padding down the
plush carpeting as he faded like a ghost into Julia's dark bedroom.

When his eyes adjusted to the darker blackness, he became aware of a
silent form.  To him, it was an angel, lying with arms spread, slightly
turned to one side, toward him.  Her breathing was not heard, but seen
with the rising and falling of the white sheet.  Her delicate arms,
carved of the finest pure ivory human beings can create, gentled cradled
the stillness, forming from it dreams of sweetness and future bliss.

To Herbert, the bed-cover caressing her body was part of a different
reality.  He looked at her, and saw only a gossamer silk veil,
transparent and longing for the ethereal realm whence it came.  Beneath
that veil... his heart pounded too fiercely for him to conceive the
image.  It was a boundary his body could not pass through it, only his
will, his steady, methodic will, cause push him through to the land of
lost Eden.

He began to raise his hand.  She was still peacefully resting, so
unaware of the lover's hand that caressed her with its intentions.  One
imagined a smile on the soft lips, a gentle nod coming forth from the
land of dreams.  She beckoned without moving, and called him though no
words could be heard, nor anything felt in that moment of intense,
passionate pause.  In that space of only seconds, an eternity of
yearning poured out like a rain, drenching the young man and his beloved
with its pulsing, blood-warmed heat.

The moon was pale white that night, soft through a fine mist that had
gathered round the house.  It was smooth and round, as if pinned firmly
under a white sheet.  There was no one to hear the mono's cry.  It was
suspended in space, as if perhaps one day it would fall, plucked from
heaven's gourd by young and eager hands.  Would it then fall to the
earth, smothered in the heat of a burning sky, gleaming brilliantly in
the night's bosom until at last, the fatal collision, the joining of two
heavenly orbs not yet meant to join?  No moon, no lovely earth, no
house, no divine players on a scene of majestic glory.  Only spent love
and the collapse of what three weeks might have meant.

Herbert had danced on the final line.  At this point, passion replaces
the mind, and there is nothing left but to behold and feel.  His heart
trembled.  He body became like a body within a body, the inner one
shuddering, the outer one cold as a naked stone on a lonely night.  This
was the last moment of decision.

It was ten, maybe twenty minutes by Herbert's reckoning before he turned
and left the house.  The tree was much harder to climb down than it had
been to climb up.  The grass was reluctant now to bear his uneven tread.
Even the property's boundary stood like a trench, although visible
divided it between the outside world and Julia's home.

Looking back, Herbert said to me that this was the greatest battle he
ever fought.  But it was more than worth it, he told me.  It would have
been tantamount to raping Julia's principles, and that would have a
planted a bitter seed in deep furrows.  One never knows when such things
will sprout up.


