---
id: 9
title: A dream
date: Tue, 26 Apr 2005 12:00:00 +0000
category: Journal
---

The following dream occurred Saturday morning, April 23rd.  It has an
added significance for me because these are the days (Apr 21 -- May 2)
when we commemorate Bahá'u'lláh's declaration in the garden of Ridván,
in Baghdad, 1863.

In the dream I was sent back in time to witness the declaration of
Christ's mission.  Not from the point of view of this world, however,
but from the next.

Accordingly, other than the strange, sourceless light and the
orange-tinted landscape, Christ was not known by the name Jesus, but
David.  He was a heroic figure, with a commanding presence and a long,
gleaming sword.  He came before the Israelites to summon them to His
kingdom, at the temple in Jerusalem.

It was a Greek sort of temple, with angled roof and several white
columns in front; it was entirely of stone.  He went to the roof of this
temple, and in an over-powering voice that all could hear called out:

"I am the Man of God!"

As He said this, a massive stone pillar fell from the sky and crashed
into the roof of the temple -- not destroying it, but fitting into a
socket there.  As it landed, the impact caused an earthquake to shake
the countryside.  The power of His declaration brought the city to its
knees, and many fell trembling.

Then He declared: "I bring the Law of God!"

Again, a pillar fell, this time connecting to the top of the previous
one.  There was another earthquake, shaking the entire city to its
foundations.

While this was happening, I was on the ground near the temple.  I had
fallen to my knees and was weeping, crying out, "I understand!  I
understand!  I finally understand!"  A feeling of utter comprehension
swept through me.  I'm not sure exactly what I understood, but it was
like seeing for the first time something that had always been in front
me, but I never recognized.  I think it had to do with realizing the
majesty of Christ's power and station.

David followed these declarations with three others that I can no longer
remember.  In the dream I repeated them to myself several times, trying
to memorize them because they seemed so important.  They ran along the
lines of: "To reveal the Way of God!", "To bring you to the House of
God!", "For such is the Will of God!"  Each declaration was punctuated
by a pillar and an earthquake -- bringing the mighty low before His
command.  The pillars were of different colors, though I can't remember
the order exactly now; something like: blue, yellow, red, green and
orange.

Once He made His declarations, He descended from the temple to face the
tribes of Israel.  They were amassed as an army to destroy Him.  He
charged forward with His sword, effortlessly dispatching the soldiers
two and three at a time with His silvery sword, shining as if bathed in
moonlight.  The dignity of His bearing was like a granite promontory
over which so many powerless waves were breaking.

As He defeated the soldiers, the archangel Michael appeared from behind
Him, glowing with a golden light, His sword shining like polished gold.
Michael's swing removed the soldiers tens and hundreds at a time.  Each
time Christ would repulse an assault, Michael would appear to lend His
assistance.

As this was happening, a great, golden dragon appeared from behind
Michael.  Part of the creature was white, while the wings were solid
gold.  It had a shape and head that was almost half dragon, half dog --
similar to the dragons of Chinese mythology.  On thinking about it more,
I think it was something like a huge, slender lion.

The lion was powerful beyond measure[^1], and decimated the army,
thousands at a stroke.  In fact, the whole of the battle lasted less
than a minute before the army was completely destroyed.  There was
nothing left of the force that had arrayed itself against Christ.

In the end He turned to the remaining tribes.  These instantly dropped
to their knee and pledged fealty.  At this Christ nodded, pointing His
sword into the distance, indicating that they were instantly to begin
their march toward the Kingdom of God.

# Interpretation

Some of the elements of this dream make sense to me, based on past
reading that I have done.  It has been a while since I read about these
things -- I hadn't been thinking of them recently -- but I recognize the
features.

I know from reading the Bible that Christ was called the son of David,
and has been referred to as the spiritual return of David.

[^1]:  "Should it be God's intention, there would appear out of the forests
of celestial might the lion of indomitable strength whose roaring is
like unto the peals of thunder reverberating in the mountains." --
Tablets of Bahá'u'lláh, p.197


