---
title: Trying
category: Journal
---

Nothing seems to get in the way of growth more than trying -- in the
sense that the word is used these days.  An example of this came up
while I was learning pool recently.  I am pretty bad at pool.  I was
never taught before, so this did not surprise me.

I asked a skillful friend to give me some pointers, and he showed me how
everything I was doing was wrong.  One of my worst areas was hitting
angles.  I could see the angle in my mind, just not hit it on the table.
He showed me different ways to visualize the contact, but ultimately
said I would have to "find a way that works for me".

As I lay across the table, "trying" to hit the ball correctly, it
occurred to me that trying was getting in my way.  We only try when
we're not certain; but if we're uncertain, how can we try?  It's like
saying I will try to know what I don't know, or do what I can't do.  How
is that different from guessing, or depending on luck?  If I knew how to
do something, I wouldn't have to try.  This made me wonder what "trying"
really is, since it seems to offer nothing.

Because I don't know how to hit the ball, I need to get scientific about
it: shoot as many ways as possible, over and over again, and measure the
results.  When I find a method that works consistently, keep practicing
until the input leads to the desired output.  Perhaps this is the
original meaning of trying: to experiment continually, paying close
attention to each action and its results.  In this way I "try" myself
through repeated experience, gradually learning the right way to shoot.

Modern "trying" gets in the way of this by creating the illusion that I
can shoot well if I only try hard enough.  But is skill a question of
knowledge or effort?  If I fail, was my trying inept or my knowledge
insufficient?  I can think of no way to become better at trying.  I can
think of many ways to improve my knowledge.

The example of shooting pool is benign, but it applies to other areas
too, like trying to become spiritual.  Here too, I find that trying is
the biggest obstacle.  There is no way to try to do what one cannot do:
if a person does not understand the grounds for patience, there is no
way to try to be patient.  The end will either be frustration, or luck,
or the belief that one needs to "try harder".  Even when success is
found, there is no certainty behind it or confidence in how to reproduce
it.  It's a completely haphazard approach to behavior.

Instead, I believe the key to growth is education through learning,
experimentation and observation.  Instead of trying to be patient,
experiment with different way of relating to situations and examine the
results.  There can be no failure in the process of education since it's
all data-gathering -- both the cases that succeed and the ones that
fail.  A large sampling of both is needed, in fact, to provide a firm
basis for conscious knowledge.

While a person is learning, they are not looking for success, but rather
an understanding of what leads to success and failure.  Once that
understanding is in place, action can follow knowledge.  This implies
detachment from the outcome while learning, since there will be many
more occurrences of failure than success.  If this detachment does not
exist, it implies a focus on the outcome rather than on understanding
the process.

So rather than trying to hit the ball correctly, I now shoot at it a few
hundred times a day, failing much more than I succeed, but learning each
time.  Enough of this, and I will discover exactly what to do, what not
to do, and why.  But the sort of trying that leads to frustration, or
"trying too hard", rather than leading to knowledge, can make some of
the simplest things impossible to see.


