---
id: 28
title: Adrift
date: Fri, 01 Sep 2006 12:00:00 +0000
category: Journal
---

Location: Jim Straus's house, 1555 Sherman Avenue, Evanston IL 60201

The more certainly we define ourselves, the more we fear an unraveling
of that knowledge in the face of change and death.

As I watched television today, I was struck by how constantly two themes
are reiterated: doom and escape.  We flirt with our fears, and then
dream of keeping them away through money, distance and association.
There are programs describing how wars might destroy us, or our failing
energy reserves, or the climate, or nature -- or the slow decline of
creativity as we submit to technology. And all of these are accompanied
by heart-pounding music of the sort you might find in a horror movie.

The underlying theme is quite obvious: existence is coming to get
you. You've struck a claim of self-independence against the vast
improbability of time and space, and now your debt is being called. Can
you run fast enough to escape it?

Those who can run fastest and furthest -- who gain popularity through
outstanding achievement, or who imprint their memory on the minds of
many -- have seemed to cheat for a moment the gaping maw of
oblivion. But what's really been achieved that time will not ultimately
scorn? What sort of numbers game can mankind hope to play against
Eternity?

I've watched films like *Dead Poet's Society*, that make philosophies like
*carpe deum* seem worth following. (That is, those who make today their
own are able to defy the anonymity of their passing days). But even this
film was not truly about the present. It seemed to imply that the
present could be used to make a claim on the future: that what we do
today can have a significance beyond the moment.

If so, it is just another idea of escape. Time cannot be distracted, or
bought, or logically disproved. Can anyone reading this even recall what
their infancy was like? Or truly what their childhood was? Time has
swallowed parts of each of us already. Even if a thread of continuity
really remains, what we were does not. *There is no self that can know
itself through every stage*. The self who engages in reflection is no
longer the self of non-reflection.

Then if everything we write is erased, why write at all? I think
understanding this is everything. Otherwise, if there is too much
investment placed on the background and future of what we do, we will
end up spending most of our energy protecting what we believe can be
possessed. In fact, the belief of possession is best evidenced through a
need to protect, and thus *our fears themselves are of the essence of
establishing a sense of permanency in time*. If we were never afraid, it
might mean there was nothing substantive enough to fear losing.

The more we are sure of who we are, the more daily life turns into a
battle against entropy: a war with the very days of our lives, each day
spent arduously defining something less durable than a mayfly. Yet it is
the beauty of our nature that we flit among the mystical planes,
changing in definition as rapidly as our thoughts. Like the quantum
physics we develop, to reflect upon our being is to change the nature of
its subject. A watch is named because it marks time, not because of
particular times it has or will show.

I think an answer to the rabid fear I see on television and in society
must begin by letting go. To acknowledge that physics has not described
our universe; that psychology has not explained the mind; that history
has not ever told us what really happened; that sociology cannot define
cultures. Whatever role these ideas play in our development, the actual
reality of the present moment is forever beyond classification. It
flirts with death. It is unstable, unsure, and largely ignorant. We do
not know what happiness is, or how to find it. We are never sure of the
meaning of life, or of our role in it. The more certainly we attempt to
describe these things to ourselves, the more tightly we create our bonds
of fear. And thus conversely: the more powerless we know ourselves to be
at describing and knowing reality, the more we are ready to experience
and accept whatever it actually is.

Yet even at the heart of such impenetrable mysteries: this breeze is
indescribably fine; these words please me to write them; and a fine bed
is waiting for me.


