---
id: 269
title: The split
date: Tue, 02 May 2006 12:00:00 +0000
category: Journal
---

Location: Colorado Springs, Colorado
Pending: true

There is a phenomenon of consciousness which I've observed to be the
cause of much heartache in the field of religious pursuit.  It is
something which causes the believer to strictly divide in his mind
between the earthly reality that appears here, and the supposed heavenly
realities which await him at the end of his trials.  This fissure in his
view of the world causes him to maintain a harsh distinction between
where he is -- his current state -- and where God is believed to dwell.
Always He seems infinitely far off, never close, never "as near as our
life's vein".

This attitude is not simply a mental position, but a fissure at the
heart of our spiritual awareness.  No wonder so many faiths equate
reunion with their Lord to the ending of the world: more than a few of
them view this fault as an essential failing of reality itself, a
mistake destined to be corrected.  We were meant to live as a unity, but
something wicked crept into man so that for now, we dwell apart in this
mortal penance.

But what is this belief, and where did it come from?

This "split" envisions a barrier between ourselves and our Goal so real,
our belief in this life as partitioned off is complete.  Of those who
pray, who hasn't said a prayer and wondered if it reached its
destination, as if the syllables themselves had faced a terrible hike of
some kind?

We've been conditioned by our experiences in space and time to imagine
most concepts in terms of scale, measure, duration, etc.  Even if we
think of "eternity", we picture it as an unending duration.  Things
exist in compartments with clear divisions, such as the "universe"
(though we've never seen its end), and "Heaven" as a place we go to
after we die.

and never fully approving of who we've become, since where we are is
never where He is.  The failure to satisfy an Entity Whose motives and
thoughts we simply cannot imagine causes a persistent sense of
separation -- a rift in our consciousness of God, which I have come to
call "the split".

Depsite its ill effects, the Split seems to be a necessary stage in the
development of consciousness.  As children, we begin to realize that we
are not our parents, and that our wishes are not the same as the wishes
of existence.  Here the "we/they" gap begins, but from there it is
vastly widened: not only are we different from the others we meet, but
we begin to perceive a difference between who we are, and who we had the
potential to be.  As soon as we're scolded for doing something wrong,
for example, there is presented to us an image of ourselves having not
done the thing in question -- and alternate path, so to speak.  This
makes sense of the question, "Why did I do that?", as if some greater I
had had the choice between two paths and the questioner is only the
result of one of them.


