---
title: What you are is never changing
tags: journal
---

What you are is never changing, and you can't put a finger on it. It can't be
humble, it can't be proud. It's only ever aware.

What you're aware of is always changing. You're aware of these emotions that
arise unbidden within you, and, using a matrix of societal norms, you give
them names and judge them good or bad, better or worse, etc.

Since before you could speak, this matrix has been layered onto you, to help
you fit in, help you become a productive and predictable member of society.
This is what the community does to survive. But you're none of these things,
and never have been. We don't choose our desires, our dispositions, our
reactions. So many of these things are probably just chemical, even though
they submit to a certain amount of control.

The error lies in identification, which gives rise to the emotional bind, and
then to baseless joy and sorrow. A roller-coaster of feelings that seem more
real than the air around you.

There is no "answer" to make this stop. Only see these things, watch them come
and go, get a feel for what your existence really is. What's left at the end
of the day, once all these emotions and reactions quiet down? What's different
tomorrow, or the next day? What stays the same?

In struggling to gain the upper hand and master such demons, we make the road
longer and more difficult. This is probably what brings about so much
frustration and agitation: the inability to control what is no more than a
vapor in the desert.

Whatever seems complex, layered, rich with distinctions, discard it. What you
call "you" is built up from so many tiny, illusory bricks; and even though we
weren't aware of it most of the time, we allowed every one to be fit into
place. The arguments we wage in our head? They aren't ours. The beliefs we
hold so dear? Not ours. The ideas, logic, the scaffolding of wisdom to help us
rationalize life? All borrowed.

What you really are is none of these. As you breathe, in and out: there, that.
It cannot be separated, and needs no joining. Only refrain from picking and
choosing.

This doesn't mean you won't feel rage anymore if somebody cuts you off the
road. Only, it should seem a curious thing, this reaction; and then, after
time has passed, more so, until almost amusing. The key lies not in what you
feel, but in really seeing it, feeling it fully, honestly, and then deciding
if you'll choose to own it, or let it be.
