:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       BC8B13AA-8107-4232-8853-A97D01DDB64F
:SLUG:     brief-thoughts
:END:
---
title: Brief thoughts
tags: journal
---

Altruism of belief is belief that's given with entire freedom, without
reference to the self. Can an unaltruistic spirit really engage in pure
belief? Or has capitalism educated us so that we're always looking for
the bottom line -- in everything.

Knowledge is not gained until one knows the consequences of that
knowledge.

A proof of learning is that we see old things in new ways. If our way of
seeing something does not change, it shows that we have not really
learned.

Plato's belief is that you assimilate perfection; that is, you achieve
it by becoming similar to it.

Efficiency eliminates creativity, because with too great an efficiency,
there's no free time remaining to create things that had not been
planned.

Understanding the purpose of things alters the context in which they are
understood, perhaps even altering the face of knowledge. So philosophy
certainly has things to offer the practical sciences!

One only feels pain at criticism if he agrees with it. If it meant
nothing, he would feel nothing. It almost seems that justification and
rationalization are a manner by which the self digests such criticisms,
so that the revelation does not utterly destroy the structures one has
built.

We create disciplines for ourselves, when we longer trust ourselves. A
law or an obligation reflects a lack of trust in the nature of those to
whom the law applies. We impose disciplines when we fear ourselves
because of this lack of trust.

Behind everything I buy, there is the person who made it, and the time
they spent, and the life they must also live.

The newbie doesn't want simplicity: He wants obviousness of function.
Yet the two are rarely the same, since to the uneducated what is obvious
is usually not germane.

Form and essence each have value insofar as they balance one another.

Self-confidence is not simply that we believe in ourselves (or maybe, it
is exactly that), but that we trust that if we were to abandon our
efforts at perfection /per se/, we would still develop into good and
worthwhile people.

Without chess men, a board, and a struggle, there is no game. It may
seem that we're always headed toward a future horizon, but the real
purpose is to provide a playing field within which to develop and prove
our skill.

There are two ways that action comes about: by relating to the present,
to what delights or disgusts; or by attempting to control the future,
dictated by one's desires and fears.

/wuwei/ is being carried by the river, amazed at the fish, taken to
places undreamt of. If we stand, to govern this flow, we severely limit
our exposure to the possible.

I realize I loathe conflict, and will try to preempt it in my mind first
as if to attack it head on, before it catches me, and so tame the fear
it holds over my soul.

Setting out to do anything without a clear purpose in my mind, just from
a desire to be "doing", will always lack the full potential of the
imagination, and the fecundity of the creative mind.
