:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       C048C2D6-6131-40F6-9D78-FB6E2A87F72E
:SLUG:     the-boredom-point
:END:
---
title: The boredom point
tags: journal
---

I seems to be facing a block which I cannot get past. By its feeling, I
believe I have encountered it many times, and in many ways, through the
past ten years. Perhaps more. But certainly ever since believing in the
Bahá'í Faith, and hopefully asking questions about things I had not
believe in before.

The block occurs whenever I try to shift my consciousness fully into the
immediate present. At such times I encounter a particularly paralyzing
way, which at the same time produces a suspension in my gut. As though I
were trying to be in the moment by "holding on", as if for fear of
losing it if I let go. But I cannot let go. This only produces more of
the same feeling in a slightly different context. Am I afraid of losing
myself to the wash of what's around me? Can I lose myself?

I have also called this barrier the "boredom point" before. It occurs
whenever I am not driven or excited to do anything else. And I have had
great difficulties with boredom all my life. Is it a fear that
communicates to me through this sense of impeding tedium? A proven way
of diverting my attention into another direction?

In the past I have ended the suspension by fantasizing myself away from
where I am, and usually becoming interested in something else at that
point, like friends or a movie. But I have always been interested to
know what lies on the other side of the boredom point. Which seems like
it would be a very unhurried appreciation of wherever I happened to be
at that moment.

Only, why the long-term psycho-somatic effects? When it is not plain
restlessness leading me there (toward that barrier) it is often a
philosophical realization that kindles my desire to come to terms with
my immediate self. In those cases, I don't let go so easily. As a
result, I may suffer abdominal tensions, acid and indigestion for more
than a week before seeking release in some other form of absorption. Why
does my own self turn me away? Force of will has never broken the
barrier, and insight alone offers only temporary reprieve.

It has always felt to be an impossible problem with a definite. If only
I could find the way that offers no trace, and answer the question that
refuses to be asked [the koan problem].
