:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       9FC7093C-DA1F-438B-9568-2D4862F27351
:SLUG:     faced-with-a-puzzle
:END:
#+filetags: :essays:
#+title: Faced with a Puzzle

When I'm at Feast, I'm almost always with the "active" believers, people
who come to Feast even if it's not their favorite thing to do (the
number of complaints I hear about Feast, constantly, underscores this).
So I feel justified in thinking that "active" Bahá'ís are Bahá'ís whose
sense of duty is strong enough to act as a sole motivator, at times when
no other motivation exists (joy, gladness to be there, meeting friends,
etc).

With these Bahá'ís -- the only Bahá'ís I see in groups -- I've often
asked about how to spiritualize the community, how to make it a place
that's /attractive/ to everyone. Because in the end, the Faith /is/
attractive to everyone, although it's outward appearance doesn't always
reflect its inner reality.

When I ask this question, these same Bahá'ís -- for whom duty is so much
a part of their life, that I don't know if they've experienced other
ways of relating to the Faith -- make suggestions that really are only
applicable to those of kindred spirit.

This past Feast, when asking this question, I heard four suggestions:

1. Devotional gatherings (which has the potential to be fun, I admit)
2. Study circles
3. A service project for the community
4. Creating committees and having the Assembly assign people to them, as
   a way for people to get to know each other by working together

These were suggested in such a way that I felt the "conventional" mode
of each of these activities was being presented. The problem is,
however, that these suggestions will only attract those who are already
attracted to them! Yes, they are valuable, yes, they are even necessary
to community health, but /up to this point, the duty-driven sector of
our community has focused on activities that appeal only to that same
group/.

I know that reading the Writings more cannot but help, and yet, this
won't work for those who are not attracted to reading more. They read
perhaps a single phrase, and this IS sufficient, according to
Bahá'u'lláh. So a different solution is needed, one that does not sound
all-over-again like the dreaded message of "Do More".

In my eleven years as a Bahá'í, the Faith in America has been very much
a "do more" religion. At every conference, in every Feast, every letter,
every message, every book, every person, when I boil down what they're
saying to me, it's always "do more". How do we attract inactive
believers? Do more. How do we teach more people? Do more. How do I
become more spiritual and loving? Do more.

At times, I feel I've joined a renewal of the Communist state, not the
peerless Faith of God. A faith which, as `Abdu'l-Bahá puts it:
"...should cause you to soar in the atmosphere of joy forever and ever."

I am not soaring, when I hear this incessant command. It does not ease
my burden, it does not lighten my spirit. God's assistance should make
life easier than living without Him, not more difficult! And I mean easy
in the sense of lightening your heart, and enlivening your spirit -- not
just physically more easy.

Yet, in all these burdensome, joyless words, I sometimes find a precious
gem of a human being who says something different. He or she says to me,
"John, I love you even if you do nothing at all." This acceptance warms
me, and prompts me /spontaneously/ to want to give something back to
them in return! I find myself wanting to do things for them, to be
around them. It fans the flame at the center of my being that had grown
so cold before.

Then I turn to the Writings, and I find that same message there. That
without love and harmony between the souls of the believers, no progress
can be achieved. That this love and acceptance IS the foundation of the
New World Order, it's very life and breath. Then I realize that these
people, by putting their love for me first, are going about things in
the most pragmatic way, by healing my tired limbs before putting them to
work -- by addressing the illness before making further demands on my
health.

I feel a deep, inner response to this message of love without having to
think about it. The difference is like night and day. One meeting will
make me feel like lead, another like spirit personified. So it must be
that the latter is closer to God's intent; it must be that this message
of love is superior to the call of duty. For love begets loyalty,
whereas duty without love is a tiring thing.

Then I turn to the community I live in, and realize my attitude toward
them has to be the same as that person's was toward me. It's OK if my
community does nothing, ceases all activity, stops moving. Only let us
kindle love and joyfulness, centered around our devotion to God, and all
things will grow from there. We have TIME in which to do this. As my
Auxiliary Board member constantly reminds me, the Kingdom of God does
not have to appear next year. Even Shoghi Effendi, in devising his
plans, waited decades long for things to near fruition, before he would
implement the next stage of his plan. He spent his whole life preparing
the Administrative Order to be the foundation of the Universal House of
Justice, but it took so long that he never saw the fruit of his labors
with his own eyes.

So even with all his energy, and vitality, and urgency, still he did
things in their proper order, and did not rush the growth of anything
before its time. I've been learning a lot about this lately from the
book "Planning Progress".

So too in my community, we talk about having a center, study circles,
devotional gatherings... but no one's heart is really in it for the
duration. Even when talking about devotional gatherings, one person
said, "Well, it's going to end up being just us coming anyway." What is
this about?? We're tired, we know we're tired, and we feel alone. The
promise of world transformation is just around the corner, and yet it
feels so far away.

To Ashley and Kathy, my only thought so far is to focus on building
bonds of fellowship between myself and other members in my community, to
the point that we feel like brothers and sisters. Then we'll have fun
doing things together, and the idea of serving can be exciting. I simply
/have/ to see these people outside of the "do more" philosophy -- just
to feel like they're real human beings!!

Everyone seems so super-human most of the time, so unreal, that it's
like a fragile barrier has interposed itself between everyone. I never
know that someone is having trouble in their marriage until it
dissolves. I don't learn that sometimes finds something I do irritating.
I rarely hear about it when I hurt someone's feelings. There is so much
concern about creating a perfect world, rather than /growing one/ from a
foundation of candor, mutual respect and closeness.

Much of this stems from frustration, I feel. We know what we want, and
what the world needs, so we're trying to fashion it. Only, all this
effort only helps the outward image of things. You can have study
circles until you're blue in the face, but I still don't know who you
are, nobody comes over to my house to say hello, no one calls me unless
it's to schedule a meeting. Is this religion a business, or is it a home
for my soul? Home can get things done too, you know. There is no fault
in putting fellowship before activity. How can a group of practical
strangers expect to present a New World Order to the rest of humanity?

Recognizing that 90% of the people in my community really /are/
strangers to me (we've never been angry at each other, never shared
intimate experiences, never learned each other's fears and hopes, etc),
I see that this must be remedied before spirituality can spread, and
before our plans will have life in them. I don't want to be part of
another study circle just to fulfill my duties. The state of affairs
right now is: I do my duty and go home. That has got to end. The Faith
has to BE my home before it can be anyone else's home.

To be my home, I need to know everyone in that home just as well as I
know my own family members. Is there time to get to know people AND do
all these duties? Not to the same extent, no. So I've canceled it all,
everything except explicit appointments, in order to save the rest of my
time for getting to know people.

Which I want desperately. To some it may seem that I'm "abandoning the
vision", but when I read the Writings I see a different vision, a
primary vision, that must come before all other things:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Turn to your Bahá'í brothers and sisters, who are living with you in the
kingdom. Indeed, the believers have not yet fully learned to draw on
each other's love for strength and consolation in time of need. The
Cause of God is endowed with tremendous powers, and /the reason the
believers do not gain more from it is because they have not learned to
duly draw these mighty forces of love and strength and harmony generated
by the Faith/.[fn:1]

#+END_QUOTE

E-mail is no way to really know people, so I can't connect here like I
can locally, hence my redistribution of time lately. Also, this is a
SLOW process. I meet at most two different people in the course of each
week. But so far it is working. At first we just played games, but now
we start to discuss our thoughts and ideas too. We share our desire for
joy, our hope for joy, our gladness to have someone to talk to. We start
to feel impatient to spread this joy, and include others in our circle.
A fire has begun to burn in my heart, in Ashley's heart, in Kathy's
heart, everywhere. It is that essential fire which Manifestation brings
every thousand years or so, a fire that spreads until it enflames the
whole earth.

Edifices are built to serve and to fan this flame, but without
regeneration from the hearts of the believers, it will lose all its
fuel. We are the salt of the Earth, and it is in our very hearts --
wherein dwells the love of God, the seat of His throne -- that the
future of humankind lies.

I think our task is to feed this flame however we can, whatever it
takes, allowing the natural processes of maturation and guidance to
direct blaze, slowly, into more and more effective channels. But the
opposite does not work. Developing standards and then exhorting people
without regard for the vitality of this flame only serves to quench it
at its beginning, since such exhortation expresses only the voice of
rejection, the voice of "you're not good enough yet", the voice of "do
more".

Armed with acceptance, may you relax, and breathe a sigh of relief.
You've already reached the cherished goal. Bahá'u'lláh wrote that,
"heaven is my Revelation". I think once you notice this, you'll grow
anxious to explore that wonderful place, which in turn will lead to
action, since action is the opposite of stillness. Then you'll want to
share what you find, which will intrigue or repel others, and they too
will realize that perfection exists in the moment, right now! All of us,
twirling together, reveling in this joy, forgetting our hatreds,
dissolving falsehood through education and realization -- I can't see
the Faith of God as intending anything else but this.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Were men to discover the motivating purpose of God's Revelation, they
would assuredly cast away their fears, and, with hearts felled with
gratitude, rejoice with exceeding gladness.[fn:2]

#+END_QUOTE

[fn:1] Shoghi Effendi, Directives from the Guardian, p.41

[fn:2] Gleanings from the Writings of Bahá'u'lláh, LXXXVIII
