:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       42DACD70-E2AE-4874-92CD-74E5CAC5EDF5
:SLUG:     building-a-bridge-between-rand-and-sartre
:END:
#+filetags: :stories:
#+title: Building a bridge between Rand and Sartre

First, some implications of Sartre's theory of being. The for-itself
(IF), expressed as human awareness or consciousness, lives in
contemplation of the in-itself (II), which is the being of the world. Of
all the things which the IF may behold, it cannot regard itself. The IF
is not "there" to be seen. It exists only insofar as it acts through the
process of being aware. While its changes to the II may be described, it
remains itself beyond the universe of description, except to say what it
is not -- which is what distinguishes its nothingness from
non-existence. (In consequence, the IF is a purely solipsistic
existence, since it may interact with other, similar beings only through
their impact on the II, but not directly, for the same reason that it
may not be immediately aware of itself.)

The II has the attributes of sufficiency, permanence of being, and of
being regarded rather than regarding. It is passive, static -- that
which is acted upon. The IF, in contrast, is active, dynamic -- and is
fully itself only when it acts, since at rest it can have no properties
of its own: the concepts of possession and attribution belong entirely
to the II. While the IF may be described from experience as possessing a
facility to act in certain ways, this description applies to its history
as reflected in the II, and becomes a reality of the IF only which it
again chooses to act in that manner.

Since the IF must ever be in motion to remain alive, and since the life
of the II is independent, beyond time, there arises the false belief
that the FI may make for itself a home in the II, there to rest and
abide for a while before returning to the realm of action. This cannot
be true, by Sartre's logic. The IF has no "place", so it can have no
home. Its understanding of "here" is a function of its own active
awareness, and is not positional. That is, it creates the concept of
"here" by being aware of "there", but this does not imply a
supra-rational "here" to which the IF adheres. The example is the dream,
where the dreamer believes himself to be located in a certain place, but
this fiction of location exists entirely within his self-awareness. In
the II there is neither "here" nor "there", but an undifferentiated
eternity that the IF carves into pieces according to its consciousness
of being, as does the mind from the abundance of imagination when we are
asleep.

Likewise, the concept of "now" and "present" are not realities
pertaining to the FI, but a function of its awareness. The present may
be said to /be/ the IF, since the present is one's awareness of the II,
and the perception of moving through time allows us to have an
experience of the act of perceiving.

The IF, being thus alien to the world, is alien even to itself. With
regard to the II it is like non-being: the hollow space that makes a
globe of clay into a bowl; but even less than this, for it has not even
the attributes of locality. Yet, what we see of the II is in fact the
richness of the FI's capacity to perceive, for otherwise it would be
saturated in its own plenitude and there would be no perception of it at
all, but a single infinity without time, space, or attribution.

By this strange irony we find that the IF is the cause -- the active
principle -- of the attributed qualities of the being of the II -- the
recipient -- yet we cannot ourselves receive this static principle of
attribution. The IF serves the II in one sense, by revealing all the
wonder and magnificence of its latent beauty; in another sense the II
serves the IF, by making manifest to the FI the wealth of its own
capacity to perceive. Beauty is in the eye of the beholder, realized
when applied to the II, with its being being through the agency of the
FI -- but resident in neither. It may be described as a perceptive
reality coming into being through the dynamic interaction between these
two -- which otherwise would exist separately as mere potentiality.

This again shows that the FI lives by interaction alone, by constant,
ever-varying perception of the II. It this were to stop, the beauty is
sees in the II would stop, and begin slowly to fade away into
nothingness. The image might remain in memory, as a token of the past
experience, but there would no longer be an experiential relationship to
that image, and hence no beauty -- for this quality exists /in/ neither,
but arises through the creative activity of the IF.

Sartre claims that the IF longs for the II, because of the properties it
seems to possess which the IF is lacking. The IF would like to carve out
a piece of the II -- set its experiences in stone, as it were, to be
repeated endlessly with the same vividness -- and declare that it "owns"
this piece: that in fact it /is/ that piece, and since others may now be
directly aware of it, the IF believes it has attained to the same
permanence of being as the II.

In Rand's terminology, the IF is the self, the ego, the living reality
behind the man. To be "selfless" to her is to give up on the active
principle of being and to worship the II as God -- even though the II
only exists in its diversity through the activity of the IF. In
scriptural terminology, that part of the II which the IF attempts to
carve out is the self, the ego, and to be selfless is to rid one's true
self of this fiction, and return his energy to where it belongs: the
active being of the IF. These opposite uses of the same word have an
identical goal: For the IF to stop clinging to the II in the existential
sense of wedding its being to it; to "detach" from the world in order to
gain the experience of real beauty found in dynamic, not static, being.

It is without name or attributes, yet the IF is the true cause of life
in the world. Without it, there would be no "world". When the IF seeks
to build a static persona in the II, in order to retire there, it is
longing to rest, to stop being the IF and become a part of the II, to
give up the responsibilities of its consciousness and start receiving
rather than creating attribution. We say it is "lonely" for the
attributes it sees in the II but can never see in itself.

Why would the IF choose this route? It must be that it finds its own
nature unendurable, such that incredible energy is spent on these
castles of ego in the II. Is the IF doomed to the agony of non-being, in
comparison to the sufficiency of the II?

Sartre seems to suggest as much, and simply to demand courage from
people in facing the true nature of their awareness. Rand has a
different answer: That we are the true representatives of being, and
that the II is as non-being compared to us; except that we are not
taught this growing up, and so we have been looking at reality with all
the terms reversed.

Since the FI cannot be "in" the II, but is ever removed by the act of
perceiving it, the FI can only experience quality by participating in
the act of the II's manifesting it through the FI's perception of it.
For example, if we go to scene in nature and see something beautiful, we
are beholding in fact our own capacity for being aware of beauty by
interacting with the contents of the II, by which we create that
attribution of its beauty and bestow it upon those contents. In that
moment, in the active state of creating a specific perception through
the agency of our own awareness, beauty passes through us, so to speak,
to land on the II. We now say that it is beautiful, but in truth we have
made it "beautiful" by the act of appreciating it according to the
values we hold.

A thing is beautiful only by this act of perception. The II may be
sufficient in itself, but its sufficiency is without attributes. Those
it appears to have are those we have given it by being conscious of it.
The universe is folded up within us, and we walk about looking at a
mirror that reflects our own soul's capacity to see. The greater our
creative ability in this regard, the more wondrous the II will appear to
be.

To see that the wealth of the II is in fact the wealth of the FI is to
entirely change our valuation of it. Before, it was seen as an
unattainable treasure trove, to be pined for but not found -- like the
gold at the end of the rainbow, or the mythical city of Atlantis. With
this shift in terms, the II turns into a palette on which we project the
artistic capacity of our own being. The II reflects the FI's own
awareness of itself. And so, for the IF, to act is to create a newer and
more beautiful world at each moment, and through this experience of
creating beauty the IF is satisfied. "And this is that spring whereof
the near ones drink..."

That the II is the lost Atlantis, forever beyond reach while promising
the fulfillment of every dream, is the ideal of a heaven which need only
to be found and the FI will somehow discover itself permanently
satisfied without the need for action. It is assumed that it will /be/
without the necessity of /being/. Rand shows this to be an impossible
state, and tantamount to a longing for non-existence. When the II is
portrayed in this way, and the false hope of continual beauty without
effort of creation is extended, many are deceived into working toward
it. The real nature of the IF is passed over, and we invest much time
and effort in amassing things, names, dreams, ideas of beauty, rather
than acting as the creators of living beauty -- which is the purpose of
the IF in Rand's terms.

When a person believes that he has acquired something in the II, and
they have ceased to actively support its attributive substance by the
active valuation of it, then he /requires/ that others do this for him,
in order to feed off the glow of their creative act by sympathy with his
memory of the experience. He can no longer know himself if its reality
is good, and must depend on others to say it is good; they make it good
for him. But a thing can only be good if it is perceived as good, so
that resting from the act of perception will drain away its goodness,
such that in order to preserve it while also resting from perceiving it,
we require that others contribute the fruits of their perception for us.
Naturally, this is a hollow substitute, a faked reality, which even the
perpetrator will come to admit in time -- if he allows himself to be
honest. It leads to a situation in which we longer valuate things
ourselves, but look to others to sustain -- and even define -- their
value for us. Because we do this, we assent to the demands of others
that we do the same for them; but since we have chosen to rest, we give
them only the words that others have given, participating in an
elaborate group fiction in which the name of goodness is now praised in
place of the reality.

The FI that is alive has no stomach for the scraps of another's
valuation, even if it were an active one. He is satisfied only with his
own. This means that he is never at rest, and that his being is founded
on the act of creation -- and not the thing created. Since the awareness
of others can apply only to the latter, and since he lives in the world
of the former, the two do not even meet. Two actors may become partners
in the act of creation, but they cannot share the world of the created.
(cf. people's experience of Roark's presence in "The Fountainhead").

When such a being of the IF meets another who is at rest -- whose hopes
are set in the II -- the first has nothing to offer the second, nor
vice-versa. The active cares only for creation, and this implies the
new; whereas the passive cares only about the created, and therefore the
old. In fact, active being must imply a destruction of the passive
being's world, since the new is by definition a challenge to the old.
When the passive attempts to offer its beautiful /things/ to the active,
it is like two worlds that cannot coexist; how do you offer a completed
canvas to someone who has asked you for a blank one on which he can
paint the inspirations of his mind? (cf. the reaction of society to
heroes, in my earlier essay)

So the dynamic being lives through the creation of beauty -- or more
exactly, by acting a channel through which it becomes perceptible in the
world: the manifestation of beauty -- and the static being must being to
die: because the IF cannot inhabit the II, nor derive any sustenance
from it. The only way for an individual to join the II is in death, when
the light of consciousness goes out and his corpse becomes an
unalterable fact of the past.

The attempt to demonstrate this reality of the IF is the intent behind
Rand's books, I believe, as well as to expose the error we have made in
raising the II to the status of completely independent being --
independent even of the IF -- whereas in the philosophy of Sartre the
being of the II -- in its diversity, as we experience it -- depends
utterly on the IF to "exist" in this sense. The II alone is
indescribable, and to a dynamic being represents a static realm that he
cannot approach. Our heaven is not there; the heaven of an active being
lies in the ever more profound experience of manifesting beauty, not
acquiescence to a static realm whose only self-possessed attribute is
the lack of all movement and consciousness whatsoever.
