:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       7DBEDFF0-DC24-4FCB-9235-FAEE5B5F0529
:SLUG:     to-youth-in-the-bahai-faith
:END:
---
title: To Youth in the Bahá'í Faith
tags: journal
---

You have all been hearing, countless times, about your responsibilities
and capacities as youth, and how the future of the Faith rests on your
shoulders. You have heard it enough that the message can get tiring, and
I have been wondering why this is so. Why should it ever tire a person
to learn that the future belongs to them?

I think it is because the meaning of this responsibility has never been
fully explained, and in fact has been used to mean something other than
what was intended. It is not the idea of your destiny that makes you
feel weighted down, but the way in which it is being said.

You see, this duty that you have is to yourselves, not to the community.
When you look at the world, and see that it needs changing, you are
responsible for making that change, because no one else is doing it. But
you are responsible to yourself, not to the world. What is the
difference?

The difference is that when you wake up and take a look around you, you
must ask yourself whether you like what you see. If you don't, make a
plan to change it, get other people to help you change it. At the end of
the day, the only person you have to ask about whether you succeeded or
not is yourself. You do not have to ask the community if it approves, or
whether they also want the same changes that you want. You go build the
world you want, and the rest of the world will follow you.

The opposite of this is the idea that you must ask the world what to do,
that you must win their approval before acting, and that when all is
said and done, they get to decide whether things are better now than
they were before. In that sense, the community wishes to use you to
build the world that THEY want, not the world that you want. It must
feel like someone wants to put a big harness on you, and tell you which
direction to go. That is maybe why the idea of a spiritual duty seems
burdensome.

But what the Writings say is that you are the inheritors the world, and
that the shape of its future is the shape you give it. You have the
ideas and the energy, and what you set out to accomplish something it
will be very hard for the world to stop you. Youth have an excitement
and mobility that older people do not have, and this is your strength.
That is why you are the ones who can build the Kingdom of God, because
you can get it done.

Instead of a harness, it is like being showing a vast, fertile valley,
and being told that now you own that valley and can plant in it whatever
you want. You want to plant wheat and feed the hungry? You go right
ahead and do it. It would be wise to learn from the experiences of those
before you, but you do not need to wait for them to tell you what to do;
you do not need their approval to begin; you do not need them to tell
you whether you are succeeding or not. If you have a dream in mind, you
will know yourself when it has come true.

So your responsibility is really an opportunity, and your duty is the
duty of someone who has inherited a vast fortune. What ideas do you
have, what are you thinking needs to be done? You can go do it. If the
Assembly is not asking you to plan Feast, create a plan yourself and
present it to the community at the next Feast. See if they say no. If
they don't approve, maybe they are the ones who need to change their
idea of what Feast should be, and not you. Youth can move the world, and
that will mean moving it from where it is now into a better future.

I hope that the idea of your destiny brings you joy and a feeling of
power, because that is what it represents. Seize the day! In a few
decades, you will be living in whichever world you decide to start
building right now.
