:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       0A1A77BE-1B67-4DA2-A288-AC2D223FF341
:SLUG:     a-contingent-freedom
:END:
---
title: A contingent freedom
tags: journal
---

I am writing now from inside the cathedral of Santa Maria Novella, which
is located across the street from the train station. It is a large
building, with flanking, enclosed courtyards, and a gigantic main room
with several smaller rooms to the back and sides, most of them fully
open to the central area.

The degree of detail is unbelievable. This building is filled, inside
and out, with statuary, gardens, huge paintings, wood carvings, marble
inlay, and stained glass. At the steps leading to one chamber there is
an entire nativity scene, done in colored statues behind a wrought iron
gate set into the stairway itself. There is so much detail that one
cannot actually see all of it, like looking at the leaves of a tree, but
seeing only one or two of the actual leaves. In the room that houses the
massive altar -- about ten feet high, eighteen feet wide, and five feet
deep, carved from marble to appear as the House of God, with six or
seven varieties of colored marble inlaid to give the impression of
windows, dome, door; and the house itself has statues, in alcoves,
carved from the marble of its sides, leading up to great angels with
their hands folded in prayer -- in this room alone, one of the panes of
stained glass contains so many individual bits of brilliant color...
even the hairs of the men's beards are traced in fine lines. And that is
only one square inch of a surface of murals and mosaic that would cover
the flooring in most people's houses. Each mural, and I count nearly
twenty in the altar room alone, tells a different part of the story of
Christianity. I can barely make out some of the finest details, the
small trees and animals hidden in the background behind sweeping
displays of man in righteous battle. The artist must have known no one
would see that tiny creature with their heads bowed, seated in the pews
fifty yards away, but if there is one thing true of this entire
cathedral it is that no one spared a single detail. They say that ours
is an age of over-specialization. I wonder with irony at how our
specialization has rid the world of this kind of attention over the
least little thing.

Among other changes, I've decided I would like to feel more physical
activity, and so purchased a month's time at a local gym (una palestra)
where I go to reduce myself to a shambles of living pain before dinner.
So far it does not take long. I watch my eyes in the mirror and think of
that duel in the Princess Bride, "to the pain". In ways it is a
delicious fire, like an oil in the lamp of the body pressed from the
fruit of the moment, and kindled to flame by the friction of the mind's
intent against unwilling flesh.

[[file:temple.of.pain][Temple of pain]]

In reading news, just as there was a sentence in /Atlas Shrugged/ that
(in my mind) connected it directly to /Zen and the Art of Motorcycle
Maintenance/, I have found a similar sentence in /Secrets of Divine
Civilization/ connecting it to /Atlas Shrugged/. It's as though Rand had
written it herself, eighty years earlier:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
They [the administrators of Persian government in the late 1800s] have
not properly understood that man's supreme honor and real happiness lie
in self-respect, in high resolves and noble purposes, in integrity and
moral quality, in immaculacy of mind.[^fn2]

#+END_QUOTE

A poem written for a mime on the streets next to the Uffizi:

[[file:a.mime][A mime]]

After finishing /Atlas Shrugged/, I found an American bookstore and
bought /The Fountainhead/, to further refine some of her ideas in my
mind. This led to the essay below. And also this thought, which occurred
to me after just a few pages of reading about the fearless hero, Howard
Roark: "The ego wants the admiration of /others/; integrity wishes only
to admire itself -- with complete honesty."

Her whole book, revolving around the life of two architects, seems to
say:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
You know, it's the Parthenon, and it's well done, but it's just a
building. We can admire the skill it represents, and that admiration
should cause us to seek the reason for such skill -- and how to find our
way to the source from which great ideas come -- but the building is
only an arrangement of stone otherwise. It's really long overdue to be
replaced by something better.

A mark of greatness is seeing a building as just a building; it is
greatness itself that deserves our admiration; it's products are only
the token. Or in other words, humility is to see a man as just a man; it
is his spirit that deserves respect; the body and the form are only the
vehicle.

#+END_QUOTE

This essay is based on Sartre's /Being and Nothingness/. It will be
difficult to make sense of without having read the first half of that
book, which is entirely about defining the being of the In-itself and
the For-itself.

[[file:dynamic.and.static.being][Dynamic and Static Being]]

A last poem, also prompted by /The Fountainhead/:

[[file:rays.of.light][Rays of light]]
