:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       21AA1C22-0A73-4591-9330-78373A355E80
:SLUG:     untitled-24
:END:
---
title: Untitled 24
tags: journal
---

It has been hot here in Europe the entire time, coating me in sweat
constantly. But I find I do not mind it much; I drink a log of water and
perhaps Tucson has inured me, since they experience much fiercer
temperatures there. My friend Alex (from Zurich, incidentally) is here
visiting me for the weekend. He told me about the heat you went through
up there!

This time away from the world has been to worthwhile to describe. Yes, I
think everyone should do it. It was good I did not bring my computer or
much else, like science fiction books. And also good that I am not
spending too much time on touristy things. Just a whole lot of time and
only my skull to fill it. That has created a propitious atmosphere for
all the realizations sent by mail. The mental progress, charted against
the rate of such realizations in my past, equals about four years worth
of time. Ordinary living makes it very hard to step apart, without
filling that space with amusements or people.

I had always felt, before now, that boredom represented a high wall; and
that if I could wait long enough to climb that wall, I would find
something fascinating on the other side. In ordinary life, it was too
high; I could never muster the patience to scale it when there were
always more interesting things to do.

But here I have climbed it, and sit on the other side. I understand the
wall, my reticence to climb it, and this fascination. It took all this
time (8 weeks) to do it: to let the boredom seep in, rather than run
from it. To sit and watch the people and admire the sky. It has a way of
working on the brain that can't be described.

Now I am bored in a very different way. It is no longer ennui -- wanting
to really want things -- but knowing what I want to do and burning to do
it. I cannot sleep from my desire to get back home and write computer
programs. I am programming in my head, with several new ideas. Life
seems so rich and... possible. Funny how impoverishing myself -- by
spending a fair amount of money and time on this trip -- has resulted in
such a large return-on-investment. I'd say even my pocketbook will come
out the better for it in the long run.
