:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       9ABCB961-AF06-4B08-843B-66DA5347E477
:SLUG:     assuming-responsibility-for-our-life
:END:
#+filetags: :journal:
#+title: Assuming responsibility for our life

The present course of my thoughts requires that I take responsibility
for everything that I do and have done. I must accept the consequences
of all my actions, and the fact that they have caused pain to others.
When I look at the world around me, I must know that I have built that
world -- whether by action or inaction -- and that no one can be blamed
or pointed to as having constructed it but me.

I'm not sure how anything I've said leads to the possibility of hiding
from myself. Right now I hear your pain, and I know that I have caused
it by writing things you find uncomfortable. Even if I did not know at
first that my words would have that affect, yet I am responsible even
for the unknown effects of my actions. There is no one else to direct
the blame to.

It is at this point that you have the freedom to respond. /You/ can
choose to continue writing, or abandon association, or tell me what a
fool I am. But what you cannot do is expect me to obey your idea of what
I should do or be. We each control one destiny only, and that is our
own. Once you have decided to act or not to act, you must accept the
world that results. If we think that the world somehow accumulates a
debt to us, that it must pay back at some point in the future, we are
only gathering the fragments of our broken hearts into a pool of misery.

I could feel pain too at what was said. However, I do not. I cannot. I
do not hold you accountable any longer for anything that you did or did
not do. The moment has passed, and my choice to respond is over. I
recognize now, that I love your freedom to hurt me more than I wish you
to behave in a particular way. Because that freedom is what it means to
be human, and I am now a lover of human nature.

So you can turn everything I'm saying around and discover that there
cannot live inside me anymore the least suggestion of blame,
fault-finding, anger, or criticism of you. Until now there has been
anger; I've felt there were injustices: but that came from feeling there
was some higher ideal you were supposed to adhere to -- in effect,
release your freedom to -- and I felt cheated that the ideal had not
delivered on its promise.

For at each moment we are a new being. Once we have suffered the
consequences of our actions -- be they good or ill -- justice is
complete, and the future becomes a new slate. You can take what I'm
saying one of two ways: As relating only to me as an individual, or as
relating to what it means to be human. I am not thinking these things in
order to escape from the past; I am not thinking about my past at all,
except to see the ways in which I have hid from responsibility.

I have put before me two ideas only: That we are free, and that human
nature is glorious. My past two weeks have been spent looking at what
follows from these two premises.
