:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       AD1A4646-596B-4BB7-99F9-1EBA3A080893
:SLUG:     nature-like-a-question
:END:
---
title: Nature like a question
tags: journal
---

I will be away for a little while, off for the holidays to my mother's
house near Irvine, to Phoenix for a Bahá'í conference and then to Tucson
for a friend's wedding, and to see the wonderful people there. And after
that, I will be teaching a Persian class at the Bosch Bahá'í School, in
Santa Cruz. So the next entry may not come until after January 12.

Meanwhile, as I watch the wet and windy world pass by my windows,
driving up and down I-280 to visit my brother and sister, I wonder if
all that I see is not the material form of some question: of God's
asking, "Do you love me?" Because the nature of God, as the best and
most wonderful of all things, makes me think of those movies where a
rich and beautiful woman, trying to find a good and sincere husband,
makes herself seem poor and less desirable in order to learn the man's
true motives. Can he love her for who she is, or would he be too dazzled
by her qualities, and not himself know why he liked her?

Or perhaps it is like the brilliant genius, whom no one can properly
understand because they don't share a similar mind. In his or her search
for friends, he is forced to seek out those willing to love him without
demands -- because otherwise they would never accept him for who he is,
but rather who they think he should be.

In both of these scenarios, the main character wants the fellowship of a
true friend: not someone who wants only what they can offer, or is
attracted only to how they appear in a certain light. Each uses a kind
of "filter" to screen out the false from the true, and to identity those
capable of loving despite brilliance, and empathizing without the need
to understand.

If our world is such a filter, it would mean that love is the way to
step through the veil. Then all that I see, all the variations and
extremes of high and low, are but the aspects of a single Light, seen
through that veil. All of which ask the question, "Can you love Me as I
am?" Because only if I can say "Yes" to all of this, can I say yes to
Whomever is behind it.

Which proposes a different meaning for heaven and hell: The one being
like the man who learns that the plain but lovely person he fell in love
with is in fact the Queen of the land; or the other being the discovery
that the one he turned down was, in fact, everything he had assumed she
wasn't. For once the veil is lifted, it is impossible to choose again
sincerely.

Happy holidays to everyone! I wish you much joy, and happy times, with
your families and friends -- wherever and whomever you are!
