:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       F35B6F76-4517-490A-8B06-C678F092CFBC
:SLUG:     another-retelling-the-metaphysics-of-light
:END:
#+filetags: :journal:
#+title: "Another retelling: The metaphysics of light"

I would like to resummarize what I've been saying, again, by talking
about the nature of light.

When I see a beautiful flower, I do not see the flower: I see the light
reflecting from that flower into my eyes. When I look at a picture of a
flower it can also be beautiful by causing similar pattern of light to
strike the retina.

What I see as beautiful is the light, reconfigured in a form I
appreciate. This light can also show me ugliness, or a host of other
qualities. I will only talk about beauty right now.

The light comes from the sun, so in a way I am looking at a watered down
version of the potential beauty of the sun. I can't look at the sun
directly because I wouldn't see it anyway; it would just blind me. And
without an object to reflect the light I wouldn't see it either. Space
is black, but it is filled with the light of our sun. It's black because
that light is not reflecting off anything. When it does, we can see it,
as with the moon.

So I only experience glimpses of the sun by looking at objects, and then
I see not the full sun or even pure light, but an aspect of its
potentiality as filtered down by the nature of the object itself. The
better the object, the greater the beauty my eyes will see; likewise
with the worse.

Nor is beauty "in" the light. Beauty is the name I give to a partial
experience of the light. No matter how much beauty I see, there is
always something more beautiful possible. You could say that light bears
the potential to be absolutely beautiful, but still the concept of
"beauty" is a limitation of the light in respect to my qualities as a
perceiver.

This means that there is a three-way relationship between the object,
the subject and the light that permits the existence of "beauty" to
become known. If one of these three did not exist, there would be no
"beauty". Beauty is not an attribute of the light, then, but of the
nature of this relationship of perception.

I cannot say beauty exists in my perception of it. I cannot say it
exists in the object I perceive. I am neither responsible for it, nor
can I possess it by owning the object. It does not even exist, as the
quality "beauty", in the light itself! You cannot find it resting
anywhere, ascribable to anything. This is because beauty is not an
attribute, but an experience. Our reference to it as an attribute refers
to the faithfulness of a certain object, in the presence of certain
perceivers, under the right conditions to light, to offer the same
experience again and again. The "beauty" is there only at the time it is
being experienced. It is not "in" any of the three parts.

Our goal is not to reach the sun. We cannot. If our eyes are open, the
goal -- in terms of this analogy -- is to seek out beauty. When we find
it, we sit in rapt admiration, simply looking on and enjoying something
that it is so wonderful. It is its own justification. Beauty /is/
because it is beautiful. No one can invent beauty and say, "Ok, there is
now such a concept as beauty and here is where to find it." Beauty has
been with man since the beginning, yet has ever remained inexplicable.
Men know it by experiencing it. If someone cannot, such as a blind
person, you cannot explain it to him. He may be able to grasp shape, but
never beauty. Fortunately for him, he can find the same quality in sound
or other media. It's presence may be found via many roads; in respect to
light, it's called beauty.
