:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       2EC0B589-4510-45A4-805A-F7142D8617AA
:SLUG:     bringing-sartre-into-the-mix
:END:
---
title: Bringing Sartre into the mix
tags: journal
---

In my last message I left out one of my favorites, Jean Paul Sartre. He
does fit into all of this, rather beautifully in fact. One of the things
he has been criticized for is his inability to explain why consciousness
exists. When faced with that problem -- and he knew it himself -- he
sort of threw his metaphysical hands in the air and called it a
"fracture in the heart of being."

Why didn't he realize the cause of the fracture? I think, personally,
that his concept of transcendence was too well done. It was so
satisfying to say that things transcend toward completeness that he
stopped at the point of realizing there are varying degrees of
completeness. Had he found this, he would have found the answer to the
very anguish he was so brave to face: the completeness of awareness.

The fracture at the heart of being -- the birth of the for-itself --
occurred so that the for-itself could experience that completeness. In
Bahá'í terms it is expressed as, "God wished to be known, so he created
the heavens and fashioned the universe." This dynamic was made possible
by the fracture: the distinguishing of seer from seen, thinker from
thought. Zen tries to eliminate this gap as if there were something
wrong with it: in order to provide a permanent end to the angst Sartre
had found. But this fracture is actually a part of the beauty we
experience, for between these two is where knowing can happen. Not
knowledge, but knowing.

Below are Pirsig's words from /Zen/, who was walking over the same
mountain as Jean Paul, but because his terminology is different -- and
because he comes from a different angle -- he doesn't drop things at
defining completeness, but wants to understand what it means for
something to be complete. He writes:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
He noted that although normally you associate Quality with objects,
feelings of Quality sometimes occur without any object at all. This is
what led him at first to think that maybe Quality is all subjective. But
subjective pleasure wasn't what he meant by Quality either. Quality
/decreases/ subjectivity. Quality takes you out of yourself [!], makes
you aware of the world around you. Quality is /opposed/ to subjectivity.

I don't know how much thought passed before he arrived at this, but
eventually he saw that Quality couldn't be independently related with
either the subject or the object but could be found /only in the
relationship of the two with each other/. It is the point at which
subject and object meet.

That sounded warm.

Quality is not a /thing/. It is an /event/.

Warmer.

It is the event at which the subject becomes aware of the object. And
because without objects there can be no subject -- because the objects
create the subject's awareness of himself -- Quality is the event at
which awareness of both subjects and objects is made possible.

Hot.

Now he knew it was coming.

This means Quality is not just the /result/ of a collision between
subject and object. The very existence of subject and object themselves
is /deduced/ from the Quality event. The Quality event is the /cause/ of
the subjects and objects [of the fracture!], which are then mistakenly
presumed to be the cause of the Quality!

Now he had that whole damned evil dilemma by the throat. The dilemma all
the time had this unseen vile presumption in it, for which there was no
logical justification, that Quality was the /effect/ of subjects and
objects. It was /not!/ He brought out his knife.

"The sun of quality," he wrote, "does not revolve around the subjects
and objects of our existence. It does not just passively illuminate
them. It is not subordinate to them in any way. It has /created/ them.
They are subordinate to /it!/"

#+END_QUOTE

He's almost written a theology! Islam says it as, "The Divine Face
riseth out of the darkness..." Quality becomes a perceptible reality not
by descending to the world of matter, or names, or definitions; it is
not perceived by becoming an attribute of consciousness; it exists
independently of both but it is /known/ by the potential of the two
together to manifest it by their interaction.

Man is the worshiper, creation is the shrine, and when he prays at this
shrine -- not a real "shrine", mind you -- then “at that time the
mystery of the famed tradition gleameth out of the darkness: 'A servant
is drawn unto Me in prayer until I answer him, and when I answer him I
become the ear wherewith he heareth.”'

/The Seven Valleys/ goes on: "For thus the Master of the house hath
appeared within His home, and all the pillars of the dwelling are ashine
with His light." Through the interaction of subject and object in the
pursuit of Quality -- through man living wholly for the sake of his
highest value, by Rand's language -- he comes upon something which is
the whole purpose of his life and the very answer to the anguish he
feels when apart from It. "The Divine Face riseth out of the
darkness...", /something/, unnameable, indescribable, unrepresentable,
but clear and obvious as the sun, appears before that individual's eyes
and becomes the focal center of his entire existence ("I become the ear
wherewith he heareth"). No one needs to tell him he is in love -- and
that this is his Beloved.

I will not belabor the point. If anyone has further interest along these
lines, write me.
