:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       4F4D9C1C-65DF-4326-A0F1-F6289B2227D2
:SLUG:     nothingness-and-self
:END:
---
title: Nothingness and self
tags: journal
---

A friend has asked me to include my current streams of thinking, along
with the other events that get posted here. Usually I have not shared
these thoughts, because they are always raw and often untested -- I
prefer to let them settle until an essay is born. But here goes the
experiment:

At the core of our being there is a point beyond which there is nothing
else. This means there is no core. What surrounds the core-of-not-being
is every idea or fiction erected to permit this nothingness to survive
intact in the endless sea of moments that pass us by.

To remove the fiction is to admit oblivion, and only two types of people
can survive such a willful annihilation: those with a will to die and
nothing to lose, and those who have faith.

The erecting of barriers between one's own nothingness and the
nothingness beyond it is like images of light which create something for
us to watch on an empty screen. An audience full of eyes, fixed on a
blank panel, enjoy a wealth of imagery depicting scenes that are not
there. Unreal, yes, but also entertaining.

When the images are stopped, there is a vacant hollow, a terminal
boredom that creeps up and overtakes the conscious mind. Deeper, deeper,
until the last wall cracks and the void without meets the void within.

This is the death of the self, but also the integration of the two parts
of one being, since nothingness itself permits no boundaries. And with
the reintegration of the psyche, a fulfillment.

It is not a fulfillment from the completion of any idea -- having
disbanded ideas. Nor does it point toward any conceivable goal. It is
instead the feeling of an existent being existing in the mode of its
existence. The harder we try to exist after a particular fashion,
according to a particular ideal, the more impossible the fact of simply
living must seem, and the more secretly terrifying the idea that such a
life cannot be.

Letting the walls dissolve, all things are beheld in reference to the
self-that-is-not-self. If this were not possible, then after dissolution
would come a vanishing. That this does not occur, that those who survive
madness go onto something more real without having anything in common to
any imagined reality, is sufficient proof there is nothing to be afraid
of.
