:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       22414E1E-2F54-4864-9658-E42B75D7959C
:SLUG:     joy-is-at-the-heart-of-it-all
:END:
#+filetags: :essays:
#+title: Joy is at the Heart of it All

Human beings were created to know joy. "He [the Ancient Beauty] hath
drained to its dregs the cup of sorrow, that all the peoples of the
earth may attain unto abiding joy, and be filled with gladness."[fn:1]
Only God can fill the heart with such joy, not by plans or activities,
but the genuine warmth of those who have touched the Source. The world,
after all, has no shortage of planners, resources, organizations; yet
despite these riches, it is still ravaged by a burning thirst. Remedying
that thirst is the aim of religion, not the creation of new structures.
"The whole world is suffering, it is sunk in misery, crushed beneath its
heavy problems."[fn:2]

This thirst expresses the soul's fundamental need to unite with God.
Inwardly, all people are "wandering distracted in search of the
Friend..."[fn:3], without even knowing what they seek. They only dimly
perceive the existence of their heartache, and are trying every approach
to find a remedy:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Indeed the chief reason for the evils now rampant in society is the lack
of spirituality. The materialistic civilization of our age has so much
absorbed the energy and interest of mankind that people in general do no
longer feel the necessity of raising themselves above the forces and
conditions of their daily material existence. There is not sufficient
demand for things that we call spiritual to differentiate them from the
needs and requirements of our physical existence.[fn:4]

#+END_QUOTE

The structures we build now are like a network of tributaries, bringing
water from the mountains to the expanse of the plains. In this, they
serve as intermediaries between the spiritual Source and mankind.
"Bahá'u'lláh has given to the world institutions to operate in an Order
designed to canalize the forces of a new civilization."[fn:5] However,
their worth depends on this transmission of spirit: they have no value
in themselves. "In this, the Bahá'í dispensation, God's Cause is spirit
unalloyed. His Cause belongeth not to the material world."[fn:6]

Thus the success of our efforts depends entirely on the presence of
spirit. Without spirit, religion itself "...will degenerate into a mere
organization, and becomes a dead thing."[fn:7] It is for want of such
spirit that all worldly attempts to cure our social problems have
failed.

This is the soul's longing, and alone can quench the deepest thirst: the
spirit of faith, granted by the Holy Spirit. It is the very light that
Bahá'u'lláh has brought to the world.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
The fourth degree of spirit is the heavenly spirit; it is the spirit of
faith and the bounty of God; it comes from the breath of the Holy
Spirit, and by the divine power it becomes the cause of eternal life. It
is the power which makes the earthly man heavenly, and the imperfect man
perfect. It makes the impure to be pure, the silent eloquent; it
purifies and sanctifies those made captive by carnal desires; it makes
the ignorant wise.[fn:8]

#+END_QUOTE

Everyone is looking for the signs of such a spirit. "The millions of
Americans who are searching for spiritual truth are searching for traces
of God's love."[fn:9] Manifesting these traces will attract souls to the
Cause; when people see us animated with love, nobility, and joy, they
will find an echo of their own hope.

If we realize that only in this lies the redemptive power of God's faith
-- not in activities, projects, or buildings -- we can use that
knowledge as a tool to assess the fruitfulness of our plans. It is both
a guide, and a measure of success. Do we find in what we do the signs of
the spirit? Does it uplift hearts, and loft them above the mundane? Does
it awaken the soul's love for its Creator?

This would all seem obvious, and yet our community struggles to find
ways to manifest these qualities -- especially in our interactions with
the public. "If actions took the place of words, the world's misery
would very soon be changed into comfort."[fn:10]

What, then, are the signs of the spirit, and how can we bring them
about? Burdening ourselves with an excess of activity is not the way,
for as Bahá'u'lláh counselled:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Lay not upon your souls that which will weary them and weigh them down,
but rather what will lighten and uplift them, so that they may soar on
the wings of the Divine verses towards the Dawning-place of His manifest
signs; this will draw you nearer to God, did ye but comprehend.[fn:11]

#+END_QUOTE

The metaphors of soaring, racing, charging, imply a lightness, a
nimbleness of heart and soul: "Be light and untrammeled as the
breeze..."[fn:12]; "...as the lightning flashes let us laugh at our
coursings through east and west."[fn:13] The sense here is to be joyful,
radiant, illumined. "Joy gives us wings! In times of joy our strength is
more vital, our intellect keener, and our understanding less
clouded."[fn:14] It is not weariness and exhaustion that will attract
others, but joy, when everywhere else there is only sorrow.

We know, for example, that Bahá'u'lláh and the Holy Family suffered
terribly. Their history is a tale of trial and abuse. And yet, though
history describes Them as such, the people of the day did not refer to
Them as sorrowful and encompassed by woe. They went to Them to find
solace from their troubles. What attracted the people was Their spirit,
not Their endurance. As `Abdu'l-Bahá tells of His experience:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Affliction beat upon this captive like the heavy rains of spring, and
the victories of the malevolent swept down in a relentless flood, and
still `Abdu'l-Bahá remained happy and serene, and relied on the grace of
the All-Merciful. That pain, that anguish, was a paradise of all
delights; those chains were the necklace of a king on a throne in
heaven. Content with God's will, utterly resigned, my heart surrendered
to whatever fate had in store, I was happy.[fn:15]

#+END_QUOTE

This type of radiant spirit is needed in the world like a lamp in a dark
night; and not the suffering, but the joy. `Abdu'l-Bahá was able to find
joy in the midst of sorrow owing to His station. We will not find it
through imitation, but by fostering whatever will increase our
spirituality, such as prayer and meditation, and "/what will lighten and
uplift/" our souls. "We, likewise, shall act according to His example
only as our inward spirits, growing and maturing through the disciplines
of prayer and practice of the Teachings, become the wellsprings of all
our attitudes and actions."[fn:16]

Therefore, may we consider the spirit, and what can attract it, in all
our planning, and perceive joy as a hallmark of success, whether it is a
joy found in the heat of fire or the refreshing rains of spring.
Whatever is lifeless, burdensome, tiring: these we should accept as
justification that our energy is better spent elsewhere. Sometimes,
doing less will achieve more, if that less is infused with spirit, and
the more not.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
How many a soul expended all its span of life in worship, endured the
mortification of the flesh, longed to gain an entry into the Kingdom,
and yet failed, while ye, with neither toil nor pain nor self-denial,
have won the prize and entered in.[fn:17]

#+END_QUOTE

There is no set recipe for manifesting the spirit. If joy and liveliness
are our guide, solutions will present themselves. Where there is joy,
"We seem better able to cope with the world and to find our sphere of
usefulness."[fn:18] If we look to this quality, rather than numbers or
achievements, people will be drawn to us by virtue of the pain in their
agonized hearts: For Bahá'ís alone bring the tidings that the Heavenly
Father has come.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt hath lost its savour,
wherewith shall it be salted? It is thenceforth good for nothing, but to
be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men. Ye are the light of
the world.... Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your
good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.[fn:19]

#+END_QUOTE

[fn:1] Bahá'u'lláh, Gleanings, p. 99

[fn:2] From a letter written on behalf of Shoghi Effendi to the Bahá'í
       children and youth of Peoria, May 8, 1942

[fn:3] Bahá'u'lláh, The Seven Valleys, pp. 5-6

[fn:4] Shoghi Effendi, Directives from the Guardian, pp. 86-87

[fn:5] Letter from the Universal House of Justice, Ridván 153, to the
       Bahá'ís of the World

[fn:6] `Abdu'l-Bahá, Selections from the Writings of, p. 256

[fn:7] Shoghi Effendi, Directives from the Guardian, p. 86

[fn:8] `Abdu'l-Bahá, Some Answered Questions, pp. 144-145

[fn:9] National Spiritual Assembly, Feast letter of March 20, 2002

[fn:10] `Abdu'l-Bahá, Paris Talks, p. 16

[fn:11] Bahá'u'lláh, Kitáb-i-Aqdas, p. 74

[fn:12] Bahá'u'lláh, Gleanings, p. 323

[fn:13] `Abdu'l-Bahá, Selections from the Writings of, p. 236

[fn:14] `Abdu'l-Bahá, Paris Talks, pp. 109-112

[fn:15] `Abdu'l-Bahá, Selections from the Writings of, p. 226

[fn:16] Universal House of Justice, Messages from 1963-1986, p. 146

[fn:17] `Abdu'l-Bahá, Selections from the Writings of, p. 18

[fn:18] `Abdu'l-Bahá, Paris Talks, p. 109

[fn:19] Matthew 5:13-16
