:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       687C95B2-F6F1-4540-A9D8-69587E30E30A
:SLUG:     untitled-3
:END:
---
title: Untitled 3
tags: journal
---

I wish you could be here to walk along the sandy beaches with me, and we
could spend the late evenings talking about these ideas rather than my
imagining us discussing them. It helps me to clarify them, to picture
how they fit into our running dialogue.

Speaking of which, recent thoughts have culminated in changes to my
ideas about the differences among things, and what Bahá'u'lláh refers to
by saying there is no differentiation in creation. I remember on that
one evening you insisted on their being an absolute standard of what is
good, suggesting that something is good by its own right, and not simply
because someone thinks it's so.

I see now where my disagreement came from: A belief that Quality and God
are separate, and that therefore one who sees only God does not see
Quality. But recently I am thinking that Quality IS God, or rather, the
Light of that unknowable Sun. Thus, something that demonstrates quality
is revealing the divine -- most abundantly so in people.

We can say then that Quality itself is the Absolute, because it is the
Face of God, and that people vary in their perception of it, and in the
choices they make to manifest it. The Manifestations are the most
perfect revealers of this Quality -- as shown by their drastic impact on
the darkness of prevailing society. Thus, it is only natural that their
Self and then their Revelation should stand as the two major proofs of
their Being.

So now I feel as though you were aiming at something instinctively,
something we all know naturally: that Quality is our soul's desire. When
I described a world-view in which Quality was eliminated entirely, what
was left?

With all this in mind, I would like to quote for you one page from
/Atlas Shrugged/. This page neatly epitomizes the book's message, while
at the same time showing how these ideas carry into other areas we've
talked about, such as joy. I think you will hear in James Taggart's
voice an echo of that attitude you've encountered often, suggesting that
we should feel suffering rather than joy if we want to be spiritual.

From /Atlas Shrugged/, p. 248: James Taggert is the main speaker, whose
sister has just accomplished what the young girl is praising him for:
building a new railroad line and suspension bridge when no one thought
it possible and everyone opposed it. James has grown to hate
accomplishment; it feels like a personal attack to them. He thinks that
those who do great things and aren't ashamed of doing them are the worst
kind of egotists, and that to expect any payment in exchange for such
labor is the worst kind of materialism. Of course, he is happy to profit
by his sister's success; one of the main theme's of Rand's book is the
undercurrent in society that feels people who do great things should not
expect personal benefit from them, that society has a right to what
they've produced, and that they should feel guilty for producing them
while others are choosing not to. This meme was made law in the
communist state of her birth, as expressed in the Marxian maxim: "From
each according to his ability, to each according to his need." When need
is seen as more virtuous than ability, Atlas should shrug, rather than
try to hold up such a world.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
"You dislike your sister, Mr. Taggart? Why?"

"Because she thinks she's so good. What right has she to think it? What
right has anybody to think he's good? Nobody's any good."

"You don't mean it, Mr. Taggart."

"I mean, we're only human beings -- and what's a human being? A weak,
ugly, sinful creature, born that way, rotten in his bones -- so humility
is the one virtue he ought to practice. He ought to spend his life on
his knees, begging to be forgiven for his dirty existence. When a man
thinks he's good -- /that's/ when he's rotten. Pride is the worst of all
sins, no matter what he's done."

"But if a man knows that what he's done is good?"

"Then he ought to apologize for it."

"To whom?"

"To those who haven't done it."

"I ... I don't understand."

"Of course you don't. It takes years and years of study in the higher
reaches of the intellect. Have you ever heard of /The Metaphysical
Contradictions of the Universe/, by Dr. Simon Pritchett?" She shook her
head, frightened. "How do you know what's good, anyway? Who knows what's
good? Who can ever know? There are no absolutes -- as Dr. Pritchett has
proved irrefutably. Nothing is absolute. Everything is a matter of
opinion. How do you know that the bridge hasn't collapsed? You only
/think/ it hasn't. How do you know that there's any bridge at all? You
think that a system of philosophy -- such as Dr. Pritchett's -- is just
something academic, remote, impractical? But it isn't. Oh, boy, how it
isn't!"

"But, Mr. Taggert, the Line you built --"

"Oh, what's the Line, anyway? It's only a material achievement. Is that
of any importance? Is there any greatness in anything material? Only a
low animal can gape at that bridge -- when there are so many higher
things in life. But do the higher things ever get recognition? Oh no!
Look at people. All that hue and cry and front pages about some trick
arrangement of some scraps of matter. Do they care about any nobler
issues? Do they ever give front pages to a phenomenon of the spirit? Do
they notice or appreciate a person of finer sensibility? And you wonder
whether it's true that a great man is doomed to unhappiness in this
depraved world!" He leaned forward, staring at her intently. "I'll tell
you ... I'll tell you something ... unhappiness is the hallmark of
virtue. If a man is unhappy, really, truly unhappy, it means that he is
a superior sort of person."

He saw the puzzled, anxious look of her face. "But, Mr. Taggart, you got
everything you wanted. Now you have the best railroad in the country,
the newspapers call you the greatest business executive of the age, they
say the stock of your company made a fortune for you overnight, you got
everything you could ask for -- aren't you glad of it?"

In the brief space of his answer, she felt frightened, sensing a sudden
fear within him. He answered, "No."

She didn't know why her voice dropped to a whisper. "You'd the rather
the bridge had collapsed?"

"I haven't said that!" he snapped sharply. The he shrugged and waved his
hand in a gesture of contempt. "You don't understand."

"I'm sorry ... Oh, I know that I have such an awful lot to learn!"

"I am talking about a hunger for something much beyond that bridge. A
hunger that nothing material will ever satisfy."

"What, Mr. Taggart? What is it you want?"

"Oh, there you go! The moment you ask, 'What it is?' you're back in the
crude, material world where everything's got to be tagged and measured.
I'm speaking of things that can't be named in materialistic words ...
the higher realms of the spirit, which man can never reach ... What's
any human achievement, anyway? The earth is only an atom whirling in the
universe -- of what importance is that bridge to the solar
system?"[fn:1]

#+END_QUOTE

[fn:1] The importance being: That a human being saw it could be done,
       and did it, and that only by his doing so would such a creation
       ever have come into being. That is how Quality appears in the
       world.
