:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       C4FBAC56-C602-4E13-AFC7-F7A881C7EE4B
:SLUG:     bright-andalucia
:END:
---
title: Bright Andalucia
tags: journal
---

Now I am writing to you all on paper, day by day, to be typed in later.
This, to better capture the pace of the days themselves. Sitges is a
very peaceful town. Although the small corridors between shops are
filled with people -- and sometimes mopeds, or cars -- at night there is
hardly a sound to be heard. It is also cool and dry, when the big city
is getting hot.

The shops all close at 2pm, then open later for a brief stretch before
sundown. The hotel keeper tells me this is for enjoying the beach, or to
take a café by the seaside. In everything there is this pace of being
relaxed. I expect that tomorrow (Sunday) there will be nothing to do but
enjoy the nothingness of doing.

My three days in this hotel end Monday, so today I arranged to rent an
apartment in the middle of town for three weeks. The price is still less
than the exact same would cost in downtown Santa Cruz, in northern
California.

I can tell that I haven't heard or spoken enough English lately when I
spent several seconds puzzling over a store named "Legend", trying to
figure out what "gend" might mean in French. On the streets I hear a
great deal of Spanish, Catalan, German, and French, with only a bit of
accented English now and then. Most people, it seems, can speak in
English, but are also willing to talk with me in Spanish, which is a
good sign.

All of the street signs are in Catalan, rendering "Plaza de España" as
"Plaça d'Espanya", though the pronunciation is identical. Stores are
"trancat" instead of cerrado (closed). And their are strange spellings
using "x" and "g" that I have yet to figure out.

I also must remark on the beauty of the people, since it is in fact
remarkable. One could fall in love ten times before turning the next
corner, if their outward selves were a sure sign of the inner. This goes
for both genders. There are also a large number of same sex couples
here, though oddly exclusively male. Coupled with the tendency for
topless bathing on the shore, this town would be much changed by a shift
toward Bahá'í morality. Am I seeing a town that provides an outlet, or a
characteristically liberal oasis; or just the European relaxation of
sexual mores, I cannot tell. But since there is no air of "flaunting"
here, people are just as happy leaving the conservatives to enjoy the
sun as well.

* Quality
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: quality
:END:
This week has been spent so far attempting to figure out the difference
between "quality" (as described very well in the book /Zen and the Art
of Motorcycle Maintenance/) and "unity" -- as in the Divine Unity
depicted in the verse, "Absolute unity excludeth all attributes." These
two ideas seem opposed to one another in a manner very difficult for me
to resolve, which arises in such contradictions as the verse, "Waste not
thy precious life in employment with this swiftly passing world", and
other such verses, contrasted with the injunction to be "anxiously
concerned with the exigencies of one's own time", and that "all men have
been created to carry forward an ever-advancing civilization."

The essential sticking point so far expresses itself in these terms:
Quality is the life of the world, in the sense of Plato's Good. The
fulfillment of existence is found in finding quality. Yet, the
fulfillment of the soul is described as the escaping of "this world" of
quality, in order that the soul's awareness may enter the realm of
unity, in which end and beginning are one, and all that one sees is God.

As Pirsig points out, to find quality one must /care/. It is essentially
revealed when an individual, caring about the presence of quality,
devotes fascinated time to the creation of something "good", both for
the joy of creating as for the desire for that quality of goodness to
become manifest.

Unity, however, renders all phenomena equal, not in appearance or value,
but equal in purpose, role, essence. If the objective is to learn, any
teacher will do; if the desire is to learn /well/, then we must start
caring about the attributes of every particular teacher, and seek the
best.

The discovery of "best" requires an ability to evaluate properly, which
I think shows the unfoundable nature of quality itself. Humanity has
always put faith in quality, seeking it as the goal of life's striving.
But our private understandings of quality are far from indicative of an
objective standard -- which is the central idea of "quality" itself. Why
did humanity reject each of the Prophets? Because they did not fit the
image of what the people were looking for; They lacked the qualities
associated with the One Whom they imagined possessed the capacity to
improve their lives.

Our world is nonetheless a world of Quality. Everything is evaluated,
judged; we are all of us constantly seeking the "better", to improve,
develop, change from a lesser state to a greater, even if the change is
to move away from the intent to change. All of this implies a journey,
the end of which is the ultimate good.

This seems to contrast with the depiction of Unity found in Sufi and
Bahá'í mystical texts.[fn:1] Bahá'u'lláh does not invalidate the meaning
of quality within this world, but He does describe a state of the soul
in which it appears to transcend this seedbed of differentiation.

In Unity, all mankind is one, the Faith of God is one, the Prophets are
one, the meaning of all events is one ("whatsoever occureth in the realm
of being is as light to His loved ones"). The end and the beginning are
one, and then even the nature -- the basis -- of the distinction fades
away. In this world there is only God, and the wayfarer knows, sees, and
thinks of nothing else, for there is nothing else.

Given these apparently opposite worlds in which the soul may live and
move, the question I cannot resolve is how one exists in both
simultaneously. There are Writings clearly addressed to striving in the
world of quality; and there are others that plainly indicate abiding
within the world of unity. The former is turmoil, suffering,
transformation, joy, variety; while the latter is peace, freedom, bliss,
and happiness. If one exists in world where there is no greater profit
in one read than in another, caring is lost -- and also, by the same
token, attachment. But without caring, where does craftsmanship go, or
intense involvement? We learn that humanity is one, but if our spouses
did not feel especially loved, what would distinguish the marriage bond?

Perhaps the world of quality is meant for souls of a particular state,
while those of unity and above continue to interact for their sake, but
not for their own? Perhaps the greatest quality comes from the absolute
inclusiveness of unity, rather than the exclusiveness of quality?

This quandary remains for the day. It represents, I think, a holding on
to quality -- a residual faith in quality -- that is preventing a real
faith in unity owing to the contradiction. It feels like holding a
mental picture of the one, but since the mind I use to approach it is in
the other, I can go nowhere. It must require some moment of grace to
reach beyond that point.

And what is the point, if anyone has read this far? It would all seem
very metaphysical, but here is a concrete example of the outcome: In
quality, we are saddened by its lack, and gladdened by achieving it; in
unity, we rejoice only in God, and material changes cannot affect us. As
I listened to a group in the hotel last night making noise until an
insane hour -- and being much bothered by it -- I knew that a being of
unity would have reacted emotionally, behaviorally, exactly as though it
were the sound of peace itself.

So, perhaps to escape from "the owes that flesh is heir to" is the
point. "Free thyself from the fetters of this world; loose thy soul from
the prison of self. Seize thy chance, for it will come to thee no
more."[fn:2]

* Just noticing
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: just-noticing
:END:
You may notice that I am not doing very much, just noticing. Most of my
time so far is spent thinking, trying to delve into a puzzle between
Quality and Unity that has been on my mind for some time. It is quite
gratifying to have entire days to devote, nibbling at the fringes of an
idea through long hours. This is perhaps what I wanted most from a
vacation, more than any particular experience. Have been reading the
book /Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance/, which is a wonderful
examination of the idea of Quality, written is very relaxing style.

* Sunday in Sitges
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: sunday-in-sitges
:END:
Today is Sunday and the swarms of humanity turn like baked loaves in the
huge furnace of the summer sky, honeyed skin waiting to be flipped over
to the other side. They fill the spaces of the shore, and each time one
is done another takes the spot.

All the shops are closed, but the cafeterías and restaurants are open.
Hands are holding their ice cream cones like olympic torch runners, but
it must be a slow race. I've found a shady spot behind a palm tree,
which gives me a place just to watch them all walk past. The tents on
the beach cost a ridiculous amount, but the grass and the palms are
free. I wonder how much the sailboats rent for...

The town itself has several piers that reach into the sea. There is a
large, very old church with a giant clock at one end. The middle of the
town is filled with shops and restaurants, while the west and east are
quiet, residential area. There is a fancy hotel to the west, but it's
too long a walk to be interesting. I see people on rented bikes. Maybe a
way to go.

[[file:sea.arms.legs]]

* Moved into apartment
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: moved-into-apartment
:END:
Monday. I have moved into the apartment now, which is 5 euros cheaper
(each euro is about $1.32 right now) and at least ten times nicer. I am
the only person on my floor, the fourth floor of a building whose bottom
is an oriental decorations shop. There are two bedrooms, one with a bunk
bed. I think I will take the top bunk. There is also a kitchen, two
outdoor terraces north and south, and since I have the top floor, the
sky is my overhang.

Mornings I have taken to going for breakfast at a small place in the
west of town called "La Granja Elsa", which is on the same street as
this apartment, the "Carrer las Parrelladas". There they serve many
wonderful things, among which the hamburger sandwich is currently my
favorite.

I don't know what it is about the food here. The ingredients of the
hamburger sandwich would be easily recognized by anyone, and yet I would
never be able to reproduce it at home. It's basically a hamburger patty
in a french roll with lettuce, cheese and tomato. The hamburger is cut
in half, giving you a sandwich for each hand -- if you were so inclined.

However, there is a lightness, an airy quality to everything, perhaps an
aspect of freshness. I take the sandwich in hand, and none of it resists
a quiet, clean bite. The same configuration back home would be tougher,
the affrontery of teeth clamping down enough to mash the burger and
shoot the tomato out the end. I'm not exactly sure what is so different,
perhaps the Quality...

* Finished Zen
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: finished-zen
:END:
Today finished /Zen/. The last two parts have left me stunned, wandering
around town with barely a thought in my head, and a strange feeling of
being immersed in fluid. It has answered many questions, though, and
explained some eccentricities. The mystery of Unity is now deeper, and
like a rising smoke that tells of a fire...

After waking, had an idea which finally draws a thin connection. But the
psychic pulverizing of yesterday makes today feel open, like a holiday.
When things are shaken up, something new is sure to rise to the surface.

Walked to the marina, but training for a Title of Navigation costs a
huge amount, and wouldn't be completed for another three weeks. Sailing
will remain a spectator sport, looks like.

Hope that things are well in all your respective locales. A cousin of
Betsy's will be coming here to visit me on Saturday. I haven't spoken to
anyone about anything in so many days, it's starting to feel like a
luxury, as if speaking were only for special occasions.

* A Prophet's sign
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: a-prophets-sign
:END:
If the Prophet's sign is perfect quality, then the labor of the true
seeker is to prepare his heart for the perception of that quality, and
to reflect it back into the world.

Quality is the value of plural existence, care of which directly relates
to depth of involvement -- or in an exalted mode, worship. Does "to know
and worship" refer to a perception of the Divine as manifest in quality?
Then the title "Most Glorious" would refer to the utmost plenitude of
quality. As well, the Prophet's life and revelation, being the greatest
proofs of His station, it is their quality that demonstrates the
Prophet's role as an icon of superlative quality.[fn:3]

And of "scaling the heights of the divine unity", perhaps the search for
quality does not occur outwardly, but in. That is, perhaps all things,
if perceived deeply enough, partake of quality equally, making the
journey of life one of depth instead of breadth. At surface levels there
is differentiation, and these facilitate or disturb according to the
perceptions of souls; but deeply enough one may commune, not with
discrete events, but always with God. "Where he seeth nothing in
creation save the Face of his Beloved One, the Honoured..."

[fn:1] I later saw the flaw in this thinking.

[fn:2] This essay reveals a dichotomy in my being which later thinking
       finally resolved (after so many years of trying to get beyond
       it): That quality and God are different forms of the same
       reality, rather than being opposite concepts as this essay
       imagines. That resolution caused me such joy, I believe it alone
       accounts for the feeling of wonder evidenced in later chapters.

[fn:3] Here I am beginning to realize a connection between God and
       quality.
