:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       3EEF1A54-B2A6-40AE-B289-D41371908B43
:SLUG:     where-once-was-an-empire
:END:
---
title: Where once was an empire...
tags: journal
---

[[file:storm.in.italy]]

* untitled
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: untitled
:END:
The sun reaches a spot of burnished leafing above me and flowers into
petals of golden light. Walls of ashen marble rise on all sides,
straining for the sky, ending in spires like fingers aimed at their
goal. Occasional statues step out from alcoves into the light, angels
and saints in constant but silent praise of the votaries whose peace is
their vigil's hope. Cobblestones are spread out, pages from a book of
stone scattered by the wind; their border in steps of granite, like an
immense dais upon which this great house of prayer is laid, itself a
statue, a body in stone with ribs of pews, vocal chords of brass pipe,
and eyes of colored glass that gaze out in wonder at the lessening
streams of the devout. The life and fate of the Duomo.

With a few brief steps to south and west, I am standing on the Ponte
Vecchio, a bridge over the river Arno. It reaches in a long curve, a cat
of stone caught in mid-stretch, its paws like arched columns, clawing
and flexing beneath the grassy banks twenty feet below.

Still further south and west, the Palazzo Pitti announces itself to all
passers in declarations of stone and brick towering in the sky. It knows
no curves, understands no subtlety of language but the clear and
definite line, the cutting angle, the surety of function over form.
While it may seem an awkward guest at a city-wide ball of churches and
bell towers, yet the clarity of its geometry, its unwillingness to
dawdle around the point in circles and arcs, is refreshing enough to
lend grace to the elegant, and charm to the well-mannered -- and so
their foil and counterpoint, a welcome addition to such a party.

Pitti stands, planted on square feet, at the entrance of the Boboli
garden, of emerald leaves and grasses dipped in jade. There is a host of
feline attendants, tiny butlers too attached to their fur coats to
remove them, and to the langorous breeze and sunlight to respond to any
guests.

In the back, at the top of curving stairs, awaits the rose garden. From
there you can see all the countryside south of Florence: a painting of
the Masters in colors that shift and move in sign of life. Rafael's
clouds are not trapped by canvas here, but graze in the blue sky like
herds of heaven's sheep; the trees, fields, and olive groves, stretch
out for miles around, tugging your soul into a vast shape that might
embrace the whole, or an endless, green palm that holds you suspended in
a scene of beauty, until the moment when its fingers close, and send you
back to the city.

[[file:enter.the.night]]

[[file:reach.of.man]]

* untitled
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: untitled-1
:END:
Another beautiful invention, in whose praise I smile at the beginning of
each night: a device that plugs into the wall with a blue tab that keeps
out mosquitos until morning. I'm glad for this, because otherwise I was
nearing the rank of Mosquito Guru, when I would have been capable of
locking eyes with a mosquito and staring him down by virtue of knowing
him better than he knew his own self.

For up to this time I have left husbands without wives, widows weeping
in the night, sons pining for their fathers, and every father a Jacob
without hope of Egypt to deliver his son. I have caught them dallying on
walls, turning corners on a lazy breeze, and mocking my fist by a quick
leap into the air, thus dodging -- but not succeeding to escape -- the
intentness of my lust for my own blood back. I have caught society
mosquitos sipping at their sanguine cocktail, notably me, and left them
only a bloody spot on my palm to show the merits of their epicurean
habit. I've even heard it told, in the smallest, buzzing voices, that
the great Mosquito King himself, surrounded by his consorts, has placed
a price on my head, promising to all his bereaved children an equal
share of the efforts of my heart. I've caught his scouts endlessly
hovering near, perhaps waiting to divine my next resting place, to
report back to the king's armies. Alas, the lonely scout is now too flat
to fly back, falling with the wind like a black leaf whose flesh is all
but torn off by a bored child.

The gates of this great, blood-sucking kingdom of my adversary, where my
name must now be legend and war chants specifically deride the name of
Wiegley, is either at the pit of the murkiest swamp, or some damp
dungeon, or some other place too loathsome and foul to hunt for at the
time time when they are hunting me -- when I would have had a chance to
steal into the king's chambers, and see what he makes of the DDT species
of hemlock. So far I have not made the journey, nor intend to, but must
confess in my heart a strange longing, as if a future Sherlock Holmes
were musing on the whereabouts of his unseen, yet deduced, mortal enemy.

Perhaps the king has even appeared to me some nights, posing as a
henchman -- though quicker of wing and wittier with his sword, as one
would expect from royalty. Maybe a whole legion of mosquito aristocrats
has, at times, dined on what they report as a delicacy beyond forgetting
-- all the rage at court -- a feast for the daring, the young, and the
inveterate risk-takers who long for a chance to try their fate. Maybe,
were I to confiscate somehow an issue of their Bloody Herald, I would
see my own face staring back at me, bemused -- though as seen through
the eyes of a mosquito, and that being only the tiny patch of skin below
my left ear they seem so fond of.

How long has it been, I wonder, with the tide of battle rolling black
and forth like a storm n a crimson sea; ten thousand puny draculas,
taking on the form of minute bats, flapping their wings eagerly under
the moonlight in hopes of chancing on my unprotected flesh. If so, then
after so many bites I wonder if this explains a certain renewed interest
in tomatoes -- that scarlet fruit -- or a gasp at hearing a diner order
a Bloody Mary, or my recent tendency to ask for steaks nearly raw, a
little extra blood dripping on the side, please.

Does this mean the onset of tiny, gossamer wings, a promise of flight at
dusk, a certain hungry look in the eyes when I see a spot of neck as a
tasty snack? Surely the king does not hope to win me by conversion!? I
would rather do honest battle as a heathen, then join the ranks of his
black-clothed faithful, always humming in prayer -- the voice a bit too
shrill -- and taking home, at my expense, drops of blood to pool
together for their evening communion. Egads! Do they intone, in wicked
unison, "The body of John", as they sup on the labors of my own heart?
Or expect some salvation from what, at best, is a salty substitute for
the whole man? A legion of these black-robed Jesuit scholars of venal
anatomy, expecting from me some hope of a future beyond the death
imparted by my own hand, and seeking it in the very flesh of that hand
itself?

I must write to the king and demand a stop to all of this. When his
emissary arrives tonight, I will have a tiny scroll ready, etched on
flakes of skin, that will tear the wings -- err, lift the veil from this
awful heresy, and permit us to resume our daily antagonism without the
unnecessary fanaticism which has perhaps been the reason for so many
bites lately. I'm sure he will understand. If there's one thing a man
can expect from a great enemy -- who is not a man -- is that his savior
and final goal in life should follow his own form, and regard me only as
a target with the disturbing capacity to strike back much harder than he
is struck. There! I hear him now, trumpeting on his tiny bugle that the
games must commence. I leave now for the trying task of writing down
these words in my own blood... -- No! I will not use you for a pen! Get
back, scoundrel! SMACK.

[[file:place.of.honor]]

* On admiration
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: on-admiration
:END:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
"Just as your body has two fundamental sensations, pleasure and pain, as
signs of its welfare or injury, as a barometer of its basic alternative,
life or death, so your consciousness has two fundamental emotions, joy
and suffering, in answer to the same alternative." -- Any Rand, Atlas
Shrugged

#+END_QUOTE

I believe man was intended to admire himself. His admiration is not for
the part in exclusion to the whole, but for whichever part honors the
best of the whole. The difference between men is not that of dirt to
gold, but of a beautiful racecar either sitting unused in a garage, or
out winning races.

A man admires himself according to his standard, by which he
distinguishes better from worse, and this honest assessment is his
surest guide and incentive to progress. Our modern culture, however,
with its ambivalence toward the individual, both demands that men do
what is admirable, and denies him the moral right to admire that result
in himself.

Because we still desire the moral confirmation that admiration
represents, we try to provoke admiration from others, as though looking
at ourselves through their eyes -- as if this were more accurate and
true, being free of the stigma of "ego". Yet we cannot know the
standards of others, or what they are admiring, or even if it is an
honest admiration. And when we do feel something, we must avoid it, like
feeling the pressure of an advancing wave while running to keep from
getting wet.

With such an ambiguous, indirect basis for self-esteem, it is easy to
reach the conclusion that it is not worth the effort that virtue
demands. Since many are willing to fake admiration for much less, it is
even possible to skirt virtue entirely and yet preserve some hollow
sense of value, which mixed with alcohol or amusement or overwork, is
enough to avoid a moral outrage.

It results in an intricate, immensely complicated game in which we seek
"points" without wanting to be seen doing so, or even to see ourselves
doing it! And when we earn these nebulous points -- for they only appear
as admiration, we do not know for sure what prompts them -- they must
occur either in such profusion that we cannot dodge all of them, or they
must reach us in moments of "weakness" when we are willing to accept
them, only to renounce them later.

In this situation, in which we long for an experience of genuine
admiration, but condemn it on "moral" grounds -- even though admiration
is the proper response to a correct moral choice -- in this atmosphere
of fundamental contradiction, it is no wonder that young girls, of
breathtaking beauty, ruin their health in the belief that they are not
beautiful. By their own standard they would know their beauty, and this
should be enough -- enough to honor their bodies and themselves, in
admiration of the fact that Beauty has become so manifest in their
person, according to their qualities and the pains they take. But since
they cannot both admire themselves and feel moral, they rely upon the
admiration of others -- while instinctively understanding that they can
never know the standards of others, and so it is an admiration they
cannot honestly accept.

This phenomenon happens to us all; for most it is not physical, but
mental or emotional. Like the kind-hearted person who believes they are
always hurting others; or the generous person who cannot give enough; or
the creative person who hates everything they do, calling it dull and
trite; or the musician who will not play for anyone because it is never
"good enough yet". This conflict is a moral dilemma, in which the motive
of reward -- admiration -- has been denied the individual, and the
counter-incentive of punishment -- self-loathing -- is all that remains.
The best a person can do is reach the zero, always knowing how easy it
is to slip back into loathing.

Thus we are not taught to admire ourselves, but rather praised for
criticizing ourselves. We can say all we like that what we've done is of
poor quality, but God forbid someone stand up in a crowd and say, "What
I've done is excellent, because I know that it is."

This admiration is the foundation of happiness, for a happy being is one
that lives his life well and knows it. What else can bring happiness? Is
it not the final reward of justice, the peace of the just? And if it is
just, one must be able to judge it according to the good, and for this
one must know what is good, which implies a full awareness of the state
of one's being: good or bad, fulfilling one's moral standard or not.

A happiness divorced from consciousness would never be sure of itself,
it would always remain an untrustworthy feeling, likely to vanish at the
first hint of opprobrium; and the bearer himself would never know
whether he had earned it or not: he might be a faqir masquerading under
a delusion. This false happiness cannot last, because man is at heart a
rational being who holds himself to exacting standards. Only those worn
out from the charade, who have given up on the inability of a moving
standard to grant them what they seek, turn to whatever form of
immediate pleasure presents itself.

The answer to this is to remember who we are: Who made us, what we're
capable of, what we've achieved: and know in our heart that a just man
is the most beautiful expression of our Creator's intent for this world,
and that the just man is the man who is capable of judging his own worth
and finding it good.

Our body, our brain, may be accidents of nature, unremarkable in
themselves, but what the active will -- the soul -- chooses to do with
that body is worth observing. The soul is a reality revealed in what it
/does/; there is no way to talk about what it /is/. The ego wants you to
praise the brain, the soul is shown in the thoughts of that brain; the
ego wants you to praise the individual, the soul is all the beauties
common to humanity that it causes to shine in that individual; the ego
would have you honor Beethoven the composer, his soul would refer you to
his music.

This spirit that is the life of all conscious action, the human spirit,
thrives by approaching and achieving what is good. How it knows the good
depends on its standard of values, and it is just insofar at it fulfills
these values. Its virtues are the expression of those values in its
choices -- which requires that it know the good from the bad in its own
actions. And thus it must despise and change the bad it finds in itself,
and admire and encourage the good. Its sorrow and happiness depend on
this fair assessment of itself. How else can it learn and grow? What
external, or delayed, reward can compare with this? When society denies
a man the right to admire his own good, it secretly wishes for him not
to exist: to become a nameless, anonymous entity without extraordinary
qualities, moving in docile acquiescence to whatever whim captures the
fancy of the whole.

In these terms I would say that spirituality is the joy one discovers
when he learns that the path to God -- toward the perfection of the
moral ideal, the Quality that gives life to Quality, the Most Glorious
of all Glory seen in creation -- lies in himself, is found in his
values, is approached by his justice, is proven in his virtue, and whose
reward is his happiness in knowing that he accepts and honors, and is
accepted and honored, by the Good. This formula is expressed in the
verse, "O thou soul who art well-assured, return unto thy Lord,
well-pleased and pleasing unto Him."

It one denies the capacity for self-admiration to the mind, he denies
this process, because it dooms one's pursuit of the Straight Path to
being haphazard, random, depending on chance inspirations at unexpected
moments to push him by grace, not virtue, in the direction of his soul's
longing. He condemns himself to the torment of knowing that his Lord is
everything good, and that he was created to manifest that good, but his
eyes are blind so he can never look at himself and know which of his
actions are helping, and which hindering, his progress along that Path
-- which is the perfect morality, the ideal most to be admired.

If you read this and understand what it points to, admire yourself.
Admire yourself for having a brain, knowing a language, understanding
abstract concepts, caring about virtue and justice, and being aware of
the good and how worthwhile it is to seek it. As I admire myself for
being able to write about these things, and caring about them, and being
willing to do whatever I can to fulfill them. These statements should
never cause shame, or cause us to shrink from our own goodness; rather
they are our badge of courage, our worthiness to stand and be counted
among the human race.

[[file:toward.the.light]]
