:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       29C61D8E-54F6-427D-A1C9-DB69BABFAFAF
:SLUG:     further-on-the-passion-of-possibility
:END:
#+filetags: :journal:
#+title: Further on the passion of possibility

It must be so wonderful to play in a band. When I listen to musicians, I
feel how connected they are to the raw power, and the moment, of
creation. It is very different with writing.

When I was living in Watsonville, I used to feel crushed by the It at my
work. Everyone around me complained, and I found myself complaining by
week's end along with the rest of them. Then I would have a lovely
weekend, and feel literal pain on Sunday night, thinking that I was
about to return to work, to have my soul crushed all over again. And one
day when I talked to a friend, seeing how excited he was about starting
a company and cutting his own path into the future, I realized how
unhappy I had become at Borland, how much I was losing my battle against
the It.

What changed it enough to be survivable was moving to Tucson, where I
could create my own emotional environment. This still wasn't a solution
to the original problem, but at least it allowed enough flexibility into
my environment that I could let off steam during the week too, instead
of just on weekends. But at the same time, over the course of years, I
found myself drifting away from Borland itself, feeling less and less
honorable about the degree of my output.

This is the only way I can relate to what you might feel as a Martian
returning to Earth. How sad it was, being at a conference or a trip, and
thinking that, "Oh no, I will have to return to the world again." Isn't
that something to ponder, that we could feel two different parts of one
world as if they were two.

I think we are always in confrontation with life. Or rather, our
morality confronts life as it presents itself, and we act to change it
according to what we think is right. For example, you sit down in front
of a blank slate, wanting to create music. It is your sense of what is
right and beautiful, musically, that shines out like a path in your
mind, and follow it toward the creation of something new and beautiful.
This is a kind of confrontation: Confronting the pre-existent, and
bringing it into existence.

We are constantly, at all times, being faced with a world we are
responsibility for, due to our capacity to choose and act. We judge the
world according to what we think is moral, and we respond to it. If our
wife is doing something immoral, we call her on it -- where the form of
our challenge must also be moral.

In some of my earlier messages my tone was harsh. I was realizing that
the opinions of others have really nothing to do with making a right
decision. What I missed was that not offending people is part of a true
morality. But the difference is that I seek not to offend people for my
own reason -- because I love the good, and the good is not to offend
others unnecessarily -- and not because I do not want them to be
offended. Everything comes back to you, not to them.

So we challenge the wrong for the sake of the good -- for the sake of
our love for the good -- and we challenge it in a way that is good. When
we do this, the divine hosts themselves assist us, for theirs is the
light illumining the hero's sword.

Because of all this, when I interact with life, I have only one question
to ask, and one answer to look for: Was it good? I have found that when
I imagine voices in my head, arguing with me, /it is not that I am
taking their thoughts into account/. Rather, I am having a dialog with
myself, in which I have anthropomorphized some of my attitudes into the
form of people I know.

For example, if I insult someone, I may then have a shadow argument in
my head, trying to justify why it was necessary. In fact, what is
happening is that I am arguing with myself. I /know/ that it was wrong,
but it very hard to judge one's self. Instead, I am judging myself
indirectly -- through the imagined agency of a third party -- and since
I see them as a third party, I am arguing to lessen the sentence.

I do the exact same thing on the flip side, too. If I write something, I
imagine other people regarding it as beautiful. What I am doing? I am
afraid that my own admiration will not be enough? Or is it that my
culture has taught me /not/ to admire myself, and so I seek admiration
by creating shadow puppets, and through them bestow upon myself the
admiration I think the work deserves.

The elimination of this shadow gallery has been starting to happen, as I
recognize that I face life only with my morality, and that only I can
judge whether I am acting well or poorly. If I insult someone, I ask my
own mind if it was wrong to do so. If so, I consult my moral code to see
what the punishment is. If it calls for apology, I must apologize.

Knowing that one has done wrong, and having no judge other than one's
own self, is proving to be /much/ more painful than I had imagined. When
there is no third party to argue with, there is only the cold, hard
truth. Then again, it is also much easier, and far more honest. And then
is no need for arguments. My path is clear, and I just have to decide if
I am willing to follow it.

And on the flip side, knowing that one has done good, and seek
admiration for none except one's own self, is proving to be far more
lonely than I had thought. Why? The joy is life is in the creating, not
other people's admiration for the creation. Haven't you often
experienced that when people thank you, it feels a bit hollow? Because
you can't really know /why/ they are thanking you, most of the time.

Being one's own judge is simpler, more accurate, but also biting and
immediate. You cannot hide. Life is not as glamorous, perhaps, but also
a ton of energy is no longer wasted in appeasing the shadow gallery.

I have found, so far, that by working toward this recognition of my
right to assess my own moral performance, it comes down to just Life and
Me. Other People are instantly taken out of the picture. Of course, I
still interact with them, but I interact with them by interacting with
my moral code and finding the right action. /I no longer reference them
in deciding what I will do or create/.

So I write a story, and I like it. Then I start thinking about how
others will like it. But I ask myself, why is my own admiration not good
enough? And I find that it is -- if I allow myself to honestly admire
it. Sometimes it's not as good as thought. That's the reality. And once
I find that I like it, I discover the most important thing of all: That
the joy of creating came from doing it, not the result.

The result is a done thing, now lifeless, fading into the past. Sure
others will enjoy it also, but I can't DO it anymore, I can't interact
with it. It's so different to be on stage, than listening to a recording
of the performance.

And so what do I want next? I used to want to revel in it, reap in the
fruits of the labor. Now I just want more. That is what comes when we
"own" our life, and the buck stops at our own front door. That is
nothing to demand from others, nor anything to expect.

This is a profound loneliness in one sense. All the many voices fade
away, and you are left standing alone to face Life. But then you
realize: you have a constant, wonderful companion with you at every
moment: Life! A wife can share that joy, but she cannot substitute for
it. She is part of Life!, but not the whole.

So no, I am not lonely. I would like a friend here, man or woman, as a
foil to create with, so that together we might reach greater heights
than either one of us alone. But I am content. I look forward to
returning to Tucson, not because of my friends there, but because being
in America will give me more opportunities to further some of my
creative ideas.

Here is one last story, to emphasize the difference: You know that I
love scifi. Well, there are not many American book stores here. One
night, I was pining for a good scifi story. That was a form of
loneliness: wanting the world to provide a companion; for someone else
to create the Beauty and present it to me, that my soul is always
hungering for.

But then I thought, if it Life!, Beauty!, Joy! that I want, why not
create it myself? Why expect someone else to do what I could just as
well? So I started writing the story, not to write it, but to read it! I
wanted the experience of good scifi, which is being immersed in another
world, seeing strange things, encountering creative thoughts. Well, that
is what I'm doing. And you know what? It is just an entertaining, it has
all the same elements that I enjoy from good scifi. It takes more work,
but this is offset by how much more satisfying it is to /create/ beauty
than just feed off another's creation. That ended my loneliness, since I
am everywhere that I am, and if I can give life to Life!, I become my
own true companion. The benefit of friends is the scale of greatness we
can accomplish together; but the essential joy of being human -- to
bring beauty and good into the world -- is something available any time,
any where, whether other people are present or not. What then would
loneliness mean?

If this is all true, loneliness is simply wanting to rest. The soul
desires beauty; we are lonely when we wish someone else to bring us that
beauty, rather than doing the work to make it. And this would be because
we value the experience of it, more than the experience of being the one
to bring to life. When that is the case, creating takes a lot of work,
and wouldn't it be nicer if a great artist created just what I'm looking
for, so I could listen instead of spending so much time composing.

That is, I think, in a subtle way, how the It starts to slip in. In
fact, while it is a joy for humans to encounter beauty, the true station
of man is to create it. And when a person gets a taste for THAT -- and
they can only really taste it if there is no intermediary between their
mind and their standard of beauty, no shadow gallery -- then seeing the
beauty of others will prompt you to want to outdo it, not relax at the
sight of it. To see Van Gogh and say, Yes! I know what you mean. And
then be inspired by your own thoughts to go outdo Van Gogh. He was just
a man like you and me. With a good eye, sure, but his spirit is the same
spirit as ours.

In that light, I cannot be content with drawing beauty from my
environment. I only feel really alive if I am putting it out. And if
loneliness is the desire for a environment where one can rest and yet
still feel beauty, then the feeling of loneliness disappears when that
is no longer what we're looking for.

I do miss people to talk to. But then I write about my thoughts on
justice and I feel so high at the beauty of their logic that I forget
about people again. Do you see what I mean? As long as my spirit is
alive, communing with Life!, there is such concept as being lonely.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
O Son of Light! Forget all save me and commune with My spirit. This is
the essence of my command, therefore turn unto it.

#+END_QUOTE

Perhaps the real trick is not remaining in a situation where your
outlets are being closed. Is this the nature of your confrontation? If a
job doesn't let you excel, it really is worth the pain to change it. If
a wife demands that you be at her side, not creating, she has to
recognize that she has no right to such a demand. Maybe the best
approach in that case is not to say, "Leave me alone, I must create",
but realize that she is facing the identical spiritual quandary as
yourself, and that perhaps together you can champion the cause of Life!
If she doesn't feel the electricity of creation, maybe it's just for
want of experiencing it lately. After all, the It does make people feel
awfully comfortable, and it gets easier and easier to think that there
is nothing more to life worth all the trouble. Isn't that the It's
slogan? :)
