:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       AB6195D8-AB11-4112-B3A9-B5A72BC77319
:SLUG:     a-mystical-commentary-on-quality
:END:
---
title: A mystical commentary on Quality
tags: journal
---

The following uses the concept of Quality, as discussed in all the
previous e-mails, to attempt a commentary on the last valley of /The
Seven Valleys/. It should be obvious these are only my opinions, so I
phrase the comments in direct language. I also continue to use the terms
"quality" and "value", instead of "God", since "God" has several
meanings, and has become a very confusing word.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
This station is the dying from self and the living in God, the being
poor in self and rich in the Desired One.

#+END_QUOTE

If "self" is that self of which we are conscious, apart from our
awareness of quality, then "dying from self" occurs as we become
absorbed in our experience of quality. This is like the car driver
taking off at full speed. His consciousness of himself as a static
entity gives way to his consciousness of the act of driving. This is his
real, living self, and so he starts to become impoverished in terms of
his definitions of what his self meant, and is now rich is the actual
fact of its meaning expressed in the fulfillment of its purpose, which
is the experience of quality.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Poverty as here referred to signifieth being poor in the things of the
created world, rich in the things of God's world.

#+END_QUOTE

The "created world" is that world of understandings and definitions --
specific perceptions -- that occur in the moment after our immediate
experience of Quality. These have their place in a functional role --
the way that everyone uses ATMs but no one is in love with them -- but
they do us wrong when we seek to possess them, and to feel enriched by
that possession. The wayfarer at this point wholly detaches himself from
these definitions as descriptors of his experience of quality, and
experience the wealth of quality that results. For example: he gives up
his "idea" that he likes a particular kind of painting, and now is free
to fall completely in love with whatever type he truly does like --
because of the quality it reveals to him.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
For when the true lover and devoted friend reacheth to the presence of
the Beloved, the sparkling beauty of the Loved One and the fire of the
lover's heart will kindle a blaze and burn away all veils and wrappings.

#+END_QUOTE

As the seeker experiences quality to a fuller extent -- "the presence of
the Beloved" -- it has exactly this effect: his love for that quality
becomes so intense that it eradicates every other considerations. He
transforms into an awareness of quality alone, and now you cannot find
any sign of "him". This "blaze" is the intensity of his joy, love and
awe at such a "beauty". And the "veils and wrappings" are all those
elements of the world and of the self which had prevented him from such
an intimate union.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Yea, all he hath, from heart to skin, will be set aflame, so that
nothing will remain save the Friend.

#+END_QUOTE

It continues to the fullest extent, consuming even his "knowledge" of
who he is; until his universe, his existence, is only quality. There is
nothing else -- nor can there be anything else (see previous essay). If
he shows any conception of the "world" at all, it is in the varying
degrees to which it manifests "the Friend".

#+BEGIN_QUOTE

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
When the qualities of the Ancient of Days stood revealed, Then the
qualities of earthly things did Moses burn away.

#+END_QUOTE

#+END_QUOTE

Here it is in condensed form, the formula of the soul's transformation:
When the highest value becomes apparent, and the soul does not turn away
from this value in denial, it will instantly begin to consume every
transitory veil. "The Ancient of Days" is God-as-manifest-in-the-world,
or the source of Quality; while "earthly things" are those ideas that
blind us to this quality.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
He who hath attained this station is sanctified from all that pertaineth
to the world.

#+END_QUOTE

All connections are dropped, and his natural freedom is restored. He is
neither dependent on words, nor meanings, nor aid, owing to his direct
communion with the Beloved. "Forget all save Me and commune with My
spirit; this is the essence of My command, therefore turn unto it." He
is now capable of fulfilling this command.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Wherefore, if those who have come to the sea of His presence are found
to possess none of the limited things of this perishable world, whether
it be outer wealth or personal opinions, it mattereth not.

#+END_QUOTE

This is because objects have no quality apart from the role they play in
quality's manifestation. Once that role ends, they have no significance
whatever. Whether it be wealth or opinions that allowed the soul to
reach his heights, those things now lose even the derivative meaning
they had in helping him get there.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
For whatever the creatures have is limited by their own limits, and
whatever the True One hath is sanctified therefrom; this utterance must
be deeply pondered that its purport may be clear.

#+END_QUOTE

This is because those things that we use to know quality must, at the
same time and with respect to their nature, also restrict our ability to
know quality. They possess inherent limitations that cannot be overcome,
which causes the soul always to seek a more excellent means of
communion. Quality itself, in the meanwhile, is not limited at all, and
awaits only the efforts of man to achieve an ever-higher degree of its
manifestation.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
"Verily the righteous shall drink of a winecup tempered at the camphor
fountain."[fn:1] If the interpretation of "camphor" become known, the
true intention will be evident.

#+END_QUOTE

I have written another essay on the meaning of camphor in this passage,
which is on my website. In the context of quality: The wine is quality,
and the winecup are those things -- inward and outward -- we use to
perceive it. The element of camphor is a detaching agent, that allows us
to use such methods without making the mistake of believing they possess
value on their own, apart from quality.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
This state is that poverty of which it is said, "Poverty is My glory."

#+END_QUOTE

The poverty of definitions. They are out there, but no longer "owned".
When a person is thus empty, he is now constantly filled by his
awareness of quality.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
This is the plane whereon the vestiges of all things are destroyed in
the traveler, and on the horizon of eternity the Divine Face riseth out
of the darkness, and the meaning of "All on the earth shall pass away,
but the face of thy Lord...." is made manifest.

#+END_QUOTE

Since the soul has burned away all obscuring veils, he is now a
nothingness-of-awareness, in Sartre's terms. He sees only; he /is/ not.
"The Divine Face" -- quality; the form of God's manifestation in the
world -- appears to him rising out of the dark of material things, like
the rising sun that mounts the sky and pours color and life into the
world of being. This quality of light is utterly independent, however,
even of its manifestation. If the world were to vanish, the sun would
still be shining. The seeker recognizes this, and so the mutability of
earthly forms is of no concern, since quality exists independently of
all changes, and would be present even if only a single atom remained.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
O Brother! Not every sea hath pearls; not every branch will flower, nor
will the nightingale sing thereon. Then, ere the nightingale of the
mystic paradise repair to the garden of God, and the rays of the
heavenly morning return to the Sun of Truth, make thou an effort, that
haply in this dustheap of the mortal world thou mayest catch a fragrance
from the everlasting garden, and live forever in the shadow of the
peoples of this city.

#+END_QUOTE

This is a warning that not everything offers quality in a form the
seeker is capable of recognizing. Until he has reached the point of
burning away all veils, those veils will obscure his ability to perceive
quality in its lesser forms. Bahá'u'lláh states that He is offering this
text (The Seven Valleys) as both a description, and an example, of
quality, so that the soul of the reader may be quickened and guided to
the palace of his love, Who dwells in the city of those who live only
for quality.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
And when thou hast attained this highest station and come to this
mightiest plane, then shalt thou gaze on the Beloved, and forget all
else.

#+END_QUOTE

Now there is only quality; one ceases even to notice that he had once
believed that things-other-than-quality had a separate form of
existence.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
The Beloved shineth on gate and wall Without a veil, O men of vision.

#+END_QUOTE

#+END_QUOTE

Another reference to quality's being everywhere, all the time. It is not
obscured from us, but we obscure ourselves from it by our selves and our
ideas.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Now hast thou abandoned the drop of life and come to the sea of the
Life-Bestower. This is the goal thou didst ask for; if it be God's will,
thou wilt gain it.

#+END_QUOTE

The individual self, as the "drop", has rejoined the sea of quality,
since he is but a part of the same drama as all other things, and is of
little significance in himself. He is great only to the extent that he
participates in this drama. The drop merges with the waters of the sea,
since the existence of forms is of the mind only, while the essence of
water -- quality -- truly exists.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
In this city, even the veils of light are split asunder and vanish away.

#+END_QUOTE

The "veils of light" are the magnificence of quality itself. For
example: good, pretty, wonderful, fun; if these are taken as having
value in themselves, apart from the quality that gives them meaning,
then again the seeker has gone astray. But even these veils are "split
asunder" at this stage, and the wayfarer is only distracted even by
quality's beauty.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
"His beauty hath no veiling save light, His face no covering save
revelation."

#+END_QUOTE

Like the Taoist: "Looked at, it cannot be seen; listened to, yet it
cannot be heard." It is everywhere; it is the most simple fact in all
existence. Souls exist only to commune with it. Yet somehow, this very
simplicity has made it the most difficult thing to grasp.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
How strange that while the Beloved is visible as the sun, yet the
heedless still hunt after tinsel and base metal.

#+END_QUOTE

Indeed, how strange that quality is everywhere, and every soul knows it,
and yet still people strive after possessions and the accretion of a
sense of self -- as if to create a substitute for the very quality they
love! Why??

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Yea, the intensity of His revelation hath covered Him, and the fullness
of His shining forth hath hidden Him.

#+END_QUOTE

Here it is explained: Quality is revealed so perfectly in the world, it
can pass by unnoticed. It is too easy for a person to imagine that there
is some other reason -- like, the attributes of their self -- that
explain why something is good. Quality does not strive to distinguish
itself from creation, since it /is/ the basis of creation's being.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Even as the sun, bright hath He shined, But alas, He hath come to the
town of the blind!

#+END_QUOTE

#+END_QUOTE

Quality is shining, every day, on a humanity that is paying no
attention, and that rarely ever does, if history is an example. All of
this stems from love of self -- even though there is nothing about the
self to be loved, except those moments when it participates in the
discovery of quality.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
In this Valley, the wayfarer leaveth behind him the stages of the
"oneness of Being and Manifestation" and reacheth a oneness that is
sanctified above these two stations.

#+END_QUOTE

I'm not familiar enough with this Sufi doctrine to connect it to
Quality.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Ecstasy alone can encompass this theme, not utterance nor argument; and
whosoever hath dwelt at this stage of the journey, or caught a breath
from this garden land, knoweth whereof We speak.

#+END_QUOTE

Quality can only be known by experience; you cannot discuss it. And once
a person knows it, they know it completely, emphatically.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
In all these journeys the traveler must stray not the breadth of a hair
from the "Law," for this is indeed the secret of the "Path" and the
fruit of the Tree of "Truth"; and in all these stages he must cling to
the robe of obedience to the commandments, and hold fast to the cord of
shunning all forbidden things, that he may be nourished from the cup of
the Law and informed of the mysteries of Truth.

#+END_QUOTE

A reference to the fact that morality is what allows our vision to be
clear enough to perceive quality. Since morality is knowing what is
better from what is worse, then an architect who is moral will be able
to create a building that can reveal quality. If he ignored the moral
laws of architecture, he would always be hunting blindly for the right
form, and would lose his way. The same applies to human lives: in which
our moral code is exactly like those laws, and our own being is the
edifice we are constructing, whose perfection determines our capacity to
know quality in its highest forms.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
For the head raised up in the love of God will certainly fall by the
sword, and the life that is kindled with longing will surely be
sacrificed, and the heart which remembereth the Loved One will surely
brim with blood.

#+END_QUOTE

An interesting statement that describes what happens in this world to
those who dedicate themselves to quality and live for nothing but. Such
a person is simply too great a threat to those who desire to sustain
their definitions apart from quality, and if such people are prone to
violence and lack restraint, they will try to beat the quality-lover
back into shape. This has been the response of society to every one of
the Manifestations of God, Who had no eye for anything but Quality, and
Whose being revealed nothing else -- and that, to the greatest extent.

[fn:1] Qur'án 76:5
