:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       48DC9DA8-1E3A-4459-8F70-D343824B172A
:SLUG:     the-unknown
:END:
---
title: The Unknown
tags: journal
---

Every Wednesday I meet up with my friend Chris at a local cafe, and we
discuss spirituality, existentialism, society and systems. These are
some of the thoughts from today's discussion:

The unknown has long been of philosophic interest to me. This is my
first attempt to codify some of those thoughts.

When discussing the unknown, several orders seem to present themselves:
The first order of the unknown, the minor unknown, concerns instances of
a known system yet to be perceived. An example of this would be chess
combinations. Although no one has ever witnessed all possible chess
combinations, the system by which such combinations are known is known,
and so the unseen combinations, while unknown, are recognizable. These
unseen combinations would be of the first order of the unknown.

The second order of the unknown, the major unknown, concerns systems
that are unknown. In this case, the instances of such systems are both
unknown and unrecognizable. Whenever these new systems are learned,
there is a profound experience of awakening to new realities, and a
shift in thinking. This type of learning is harder to come by -- unless
a friend or teacher can identify the systems still unknown to the seeker
-- but learning these systems can be profoundly satisfying. Once
learned, the contents or implications of the system become reduced to
the first order of the unknown.

The third order of the unknown, the inaccessible unknown, refers to
systems that are both unknown and unknowable, but which remain
recognizable in their effects. The differences in life experience
between men and women is a good example: A man can learn to appreciate
the systems by which a woman understands her life, but he can never
directly know that system; as such, the instances of that system are
never directly recognizable, but only identifiable by developing an
affinity for the traits often characterizing such instances. This
implies being aware of something without being able to know it.

The fourth order of the unknown, the great unknown, applies to systems
which are both unknowable and unrecognizable. Their contents cannot be
recognized in terms of the systems to which they properly belong,
although they may be referred to in terms of their likeness to instances
of other systems. But since these references are always misapplied, the
instances cannot be understood fully. An example of this would be a dog
viewing a man's relationship to money. Since money is an abstract
reality inconceivable to the dog, the dog at best will identify the
emotions of attachment a man might display for the money. Since this
attachment does not truly relate to the foundation of money's meaning,
it is merely a coincidence of money with attachment, and not an
understanding of money itself.

The fifth order of the unknown, the perfect unknown, is that which
cannot be known by any system, and is knowable only through its own
being. There are no examples that come to mind, since an example would
imply a system in which to frame the example.

Human beings show a propensity to avoid the unknown in every respect,
the moreso the higher the order. Also, those who undertake to enter the
unknown -- and establish a relationship with those contents, whether by
knowledge or perception or faith -- experience a degree of revelation
and awakening in proportion to the order traversed.

I define "faith" as the faculty that allows man to venture into the
unknown. In the first order, this faith consists of the belief that
unwitnessed instances described by a system will be found if searched
for. Without that faith, a person would believe the search fruitless and
would not expend the effort. Archaeologists look for fossils because
they have faith that fossils may be found, according to the system of
archaeology they have studied.

In the second order, the faith is that new systems will integrate and
improve our understanding of the world. Those who seek new systems seek
to enrich their view of life. Since new systems also change how
previously known systems are viewed, there is a greater aversion to this
knowledge. Our "faith" is that the change will have value, and not
merely ruin what has been gained so far.

In the third order, faith holds that foreign systems, while describing
values that cannot be known, yet describe a genuine value in another
context. For example, we hear someone claiming that a reality they
experience makes them happy, and we learn by observation that the
happiness they experience is genuine and worthwhile. We may never
understand why -- and the experience may even be detrimental to us --
yet by affinity we can appreciate the value-at-a-distance described by
the unknowable system. Our faith is that this value is true in that
other system, even if we have no personal knowledge of a system for
which that value would be true.

Approaching the third unknown is very difficult, as it requires
accepting that things are true in unknowable systems that are false in
systems that we do know. Trust is needed for this to happen -- which is
the faith referred to. The enrichment of the individual here is great,
however, in that it allows him to relate to foreign systems that would
otherwise remain entirely inaccesible by him.

In the fourth order, faith is the only way to approach these systems, in
which case the faith is that such systems exist at all. For a system of
the fourth order it is always possible to believe that no such system
exists, and that whatever instances of that systems are claimed to exist
are merely instances of other unknown systems of the second or third
order. The after-life falls clearly into the category of the fourth
unknown.

Mystics are those who doggedly pursue the fourth unknown, and seek to
commune with its mysteries without reference to knowledge. That this is
fruitful and worthwhile is the essence of their faith. Without this
faith, no concrete reason is possible to suggest that a fourth unknown
exists -- and this is why these unknowns are placed in the fourth order.

The fifth order may only be approached by identity, since it can only be
known immediately through the experience of its own being. Even this
knowing is not knowledge in the sense of the preceding orders, since it
is not knowledge through a system, and has no instances to refer to. It
is the fifth order to which Hallaj may be referring when he says, "I am
the Truth"; or the Qur'an when it declares, "He who hath known himself
hath known God."

The five orders of the unknown may be expressed in terms of five
correlated orders of the known:

1. The knowledge of instances of a system.
2. The knowledge of systems.
3. The recognition of unknowable yet valid systems.
4. The apprehension through faith of systems both unknowable and
   unrecognizable.
5. The identity through faith with that which cannot be referenced by
   any system.

And the five corresponding degrees of faith:

1. Faith that our knowledge of a system accurately predicts the
   unobserved instances of that system.
2. Faith that our experience of systems implies the existence of further
   and better systems.
3. Faith that unknowable systems are as valid as knowable systems within
   their relative context.
4. Faith that unknowable systems whose context cannot be known both
   exist and pertain to the reality we experience.
5. Faith that an unknowable exists which is above all systems, and is
   the reason for their coherence.

The enrichment of mankind is found by progressing into the unknown, with
the greatest riches found in the highest orders. To proceed, faith must
overcome fear and aversion, which is essentially the belief that such a
journey will be rewarding in the end, and worth the pain and discomfort
it engenders.

How one proceeds in the case of the first and second order is typically
the task of education. The third order is forced upon people who want to
learn how to relate to those of a different background or life
experience. The fourth and fifth are the object of religion, being as
well the easiest to dismiss and the most painful to undertake. And not
everyone who associates themselves with religion has begun that journey.

The definition of God is particularly a question of the fifth unknown,
meaning that its answer must forever remain unknown, even though a union
with the source may ultimately be sought. Who is man, if not a creature
capable of recognizing that this unknown exists, and of setting out with
determination to find it? In our relationship to the unknown is much
that defines who we are.
