:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       C640433A-EC7E-4E2B-B2EF-FB2EA2997B71
:SLUG:     untitled-18
:END:
---
title: Untitled 18
tags: journal
---

You make me realize that I do not want people to hear my words: but what
they labor to describe. To that end, I'd be willing to shout them from
the rooftops! Look at what I found in /Secrets of Divine Civilization/:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
It is therefore urgent that beneficial articles and books be written,
clearly and definitely establishing what the present-day requirements of
the people are, and what will conduce to the happiness and advancement
of society. These should be published and spread throughout the nation,
so that at least the leaders among the people should become, to some
degree, awakened, and arise to exert themselves along those lines which
will lead to their abiding honor. The publication of high thoughts is
the dynamic power in the arteries of life; it is the very soul of the
world. Thoughts are a boundless sea, and the effects and varying
conditions of existence are as the separate forms and individual limits
of the waves; not until the sea boils up will the waves rise and scatter
their pearls of knowledge on the shore of life.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Thou, Brother, art thy thought alone, The rest is only thew and bone.

#+END_QUOTE

#+END_QUOTE

Something else I've noticed: People make a great clamor about serving
others, and have even argued with me during this trip that everything we
do should be done in reference to them. Perhaps they have not considered
the result of that logic: That everyone else should orient their lives
around them. But at any rate, while serving others is certainly a moral
duty, /none of our fundamental religious observances make any reference
to other people/. The obligatory prayers don't say anything about our
relation to others; they talk about who we are and our relationship to
God. Fasting is a completely personal affair, not even really to be
talked about. And Huququ'llah, while it may serve others ultimately, is
expressed as a matter strictly between the individual and God alone.
Interesting, no?
