:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       3CC551E9-CE7F-41CF-B2CD-98FBC93FD170
:SLUG:     faith-love-and-perfection
:END:
#+filetags: :journal:
#+title: Faith, love and perfection

These three ideas have been on my mind a great deal lately. Let me see
if I can summarize:

Faith means to me that life is not dispassionate or inert. Rather, the
events of one's life are animated by a purpose, which is always leading
one toward betterment. Thus, there is a "faith" that /all/ events help
us on our way, and this builds a confidence that whatever we strike out
to do, life will help us to accomplish. Such faith undoes fear, and
informs us that no matter what happens, we cannot lose: "The friends of
God shall win and profit under all conditions, and shall attain true
wealth."

Perfection is the idea that however life may appear, it is perfect in
its being. Although we see only slivers of the present, if we saw the
whole picture at once, we would discover that nothing need improve for
us to reach our goal. In a way, life is designed for each individual to
fit their specific needs. If things appear oddly done, or flawed, it is
only because this is what will tweak us in the ways we need. We are
immersed in the world, and so we see it as though reading a book one
letter at a time. We cannot visualize the whole story, and so things
appear flawed in the moment. But perfection is what the eye of faith
will see; whenever we see imperfection, we lack faith in what life has
presented us with.

Combining these two ideas is the way of Love. Religion teaches that the
purpose of life is to educate the soul and develop its spirituality.
This primarily refers to developing the capacity to love, since all
other virtues stem from this (or so I understand). From the love of God
comes the love of His will, and from that comes obedience to His
commandments, and fulfillment of the duties that form the basis of
society. Even "irreligious" people participate in this, in which case I
believe their irreligion has to do more with institutions and beliefs,
and not the basic principles that cause the soul to love what is good
about goodness.

If the purpose of life is to master love, then faith would say that
everything that happens is meant to improve us in this direction: that
the world we see is perfectly ordered to allow this improvement.

Such a perfection is a perfection of purpose, not of immediate form. If
we look at the world in any given moment, it is easy to point out
variations from our imagined perfection, such as the degree of poverty
and crime around us. But if the purpose is to develop love, perhaps
there is another kind of perfection -- one that has nothing to do with
what we think is best, but with what really /is/ best for the education
of man.

For example, if my friends had no "flaws", there would be no difficulty
in loving them all the time. It would not even really be love, but a
kind of automatic response to the perfections of their qualities. But
the lover, looking at the world, does not find any need to change it. It
is perfect in its being, and does not need improvement. What the lover
responds to is what /is/ rather than what /could be/. And when he loves
things as they are, he will ask, "What can I offer, what can I do?" This
is how love motivates him to act.

Without such faith, and seeing what appears to be an imperfect world, we
feel driven to correct it, to fix it. Since this does not proceed from a
motive of love, life (so I believe) will respond /in whatever way can
teach us about love/. This might mean, in some cases, that things would
get worse by trying to fix them, until we give up any hope of
controlling the world, and learn how to accept it. For whenever we try
to "fix" a perfect world, we only cause it to respond in such a way as
to maintain its perfection. And if what is perfect is what trains us and
educates our souls, then whatever life was doing before, it will
continue to do after our attempted fix.

The upshot of this is that appreciating the lessons of life reveals an
entirely different basis for action. Rather than viewing all that is
imperfect, in ourselves and around us, and setting up a huge task list
to fix them all, the object is to accept and love what we see to such an
extent that we feel moved to offer something of ourselves. `Abdu'l-Bah√°
said, "Let your heart burn with loving kindness for all who may cross
your path." Is this possible when we are looking at the flaws of the
world so we may fix them? If we no longer have any interest in flaws,
but in learning to love what /is/, our entire relationship to life
changes. It becomes a matter of faith, not measurement. Whoever the
people we meet may be, the goal is to "burn with loving kindness"; and
thus their very being, for us, is a lesson to that end.

And if we did "perfect" the world, where would the lessons go? If we
imagine and dream of a future with no war, no hatred, no flaws -- what
would exercise the capacities of man to overcome hatred? If we work
toward a world that no longer challenges us, what are we wanting from
life? That it leave us alone?

If life is exactly the set of lessons required to prepare us for what
comes next -- so asks faith -- then the life we see today is the life we
are called upon to love. In our world of misery, much of that love will
take the form of comfort, solace, aid. However, desiring to aid someone
from love is a very different motive from wanting only that their pain
cease troubling our conscience.

So faith sees a perfect world, whose purpose is to train us how to love.
And it will always do so, and always be the same "world" relative to our
state. In this sense, the world we see is really a mirror of our state
of growth. As we change, it changes; this is the nature of its
perfection. In such an adaptable climate, the real question is not how
to achieve the perfections we imagine, but how to respond to what we
need.

And if life really is perfect, then there is nothing I ever need ask of
it myself; for it already provides (and always will) exactly what I've
been needing all along. "Gain is their lot, whatever the deal."
