:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       83022FAC-1B49-40D1-8A9C-C8ACD451E5B3
:SLUG:     the-traveler
:END:
---
title: The Traveler
tags: stories
---

A harsh light from the noon-day sun washed over a little grove of pine
trees. The air was exceptionally clean, and the trees reached up into
clear, blue sky. The light also revealed a middle-aged man, lying on the
ground in the space between the trees.

He had been asleep for a long time -- most of the day. He was awake now,
and blinking his eyes, while a wondering look appeared on his face. He
looked up at the tall trees, and turned around in circles gazing at both
ground and sky. By appearance, he could have been anyone: his clothes
were plain, his hair short-cut brown, his face lightly tanned from the
sun. But something about his eyes was far from ordinary. They would have
arrested any onlooker who had seen him at that moment.

As he stood, something in his eyes darkened, and they took on a normal
appearance again. An accurate judge of character might have described
this change as a result of becoming "grounded again in reality". For the
glade was no longer a bizarre, strange place to the man. Now he knew how
he had come there, and why.

His first action was to close his eyes, while he reviewed something in
his mind. Maybe it was a plan of attack, or maybe it was a prayer of
some kind. His temples twitched with activity, and his cheeks were very
tense. Then suddenly, as if a cloud passed over the bright sun of his
mental activity -- and indeed an actual cloud did pass over the sun at
that moment -- his composure became entirely calm. It was a calmness
that nullified any tensions of any kind. The feeling spread out in
waves, touching the plants and transforming the air. A religionist might
have described the feeling as "hallowed", or sacred. The stillness acted
like a gravitational force, drawing in all of the conflicting energies
of nature from the forest and the wind. Ultimately, the silence was
complete. Not a thing moved. Even the insects seemed to have been
transfixed by the depth of his concentration.

Then it broke. With a slow sigh he let go of the stillness, and allowed
the normal tensions of his body to move back into the face and hands. A
look of dismay, but at the same time one of curiosity, played into his
eyes. He turned toward the north, and began walking away from the open
space, into the trees.
