:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       A0C6BCAF-64DA-4BC3-8280-0BD8439E9E5D
:SLUG:     brief-thoughts-on-the-camphor-fountain
:END:
---
title: Brief thoughts on "the camphor fountain"
tags: essays
---

In the Qur'án, verse 76:5, we find:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
'inna al-abraara yashrabuuna min ka'siN kaana mizaaju-haa kaafuuraN
(Verily the righteous shall drink from a wine-cup that has been tempered
with camphor.)

#+END_QUOTE

The literal translation of the Qur'ánic verse is:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
'inna (verily, thus) al-abraara (the ones who are just) yashrabuuna
(shall drink, imbibe (from sharaba)) min ka'siN (from a wine-cup (i.e.,
cup filled with wine)) kaana mizaaju-haa (that has been tempered (from
mizaaj, temperament)) kaafuuraN ((by) camphor)

#+END_QUOTE

Historically, camphor was an extract with many uses, which was added to
wine to enhance its flavor and bouquet. Since it is also rumored to
quiet the passions, it has been linked with detachment from the world,
and being freed from the vagaries of the heart.

In Persian literature, the word "camphor" is used with four meanings
(besides the oil/plant itself): to convey whiteness, fragrance,
something with a cooling effect, and a lack of virility (because the
passions have been cooled). For example:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
tuuda'-i kaafuur -- A heap of snow; a fair skin; a white head.

khurda'-i kaafuur -- (crumbs of camphor), The stars.

kaafuur khwurdan -- To eat camphor (an expression used to imply
deficiency of virility).

kaafuur-baar -- (raining camphor) Anything cold or fragrant; snowing.

may-i kaafuur -- Camphorated wine (which is done to "cool" it).

#+END_QUOTE

One Qur'ánic commentator writes:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
The root of the word camphor that has been used in this context means
suppressing and covering up. This is an indication that they have drunk
of the cup of cutting asunder from the world and turning to God with
such sincerity that their love of the world has been cooled down. All
emotions are generated by the ideas of the heart and when the heart
withdraws far away from improper thoughts and has no concern with them,
the emotions are subdued till they disappear altogether. In this verse
God Almighty desires to convey that those who turn wholly to Him cast
aside their passions and their hearts become cool to worldly activities
and their emotions are covered up and suppressed as poisonous matter is
suppressed by camphor.[fn:1]

#+END_QUOTE

This meaning resonates with Bahá'u'lláh's reference to the above verse
when discussing freedom from worldly limitations:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
He who hath attained this station [of True Poverty and Absolute
Nothingness] is sanctified from all that pertaineth to the world.
Wherefore, if those who have come to the sea of His presence are found
to possess none of the limited things of this perishable world, whether
it be outer wealth or personal opinions, it mattereth not. For whatever
the creatures have is limited by their own limits, and whatever the True
One hath is sanctified therefrom; this utterance must be deeply pondered
that its purport may be clear. "Verily the righteous shall drink of a
winecup tempered at the camphor fountain." If the interpretation of
"camphor" become known, the true intention will be evident. This state
is that poverty of which it is said, "Poverty is My glory."[fn:2]

#+END_QUOTE

If the interpretation of camphor here referred is "releasing man from
bondage to limited things", it fits nicely.

Bahá'u'lláh also brings up this verse when discussing the necessary
qualities for apprehending the meaning of the Holy Writings:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Hence, it is clear and manifest that by the words "the sun shall be
darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall
fall from heaven" is intended the waywardness of the divines, and the
annulment of laws firmly established by divine Revelation, all of which,
in symbolic language, have been foreshadowed by the Manifestation of
God. None except the righteous shall partake of this cup, none but the
godly can share therein. "The righteous shall drink of a cup tempered at
the camphor fountain."[fn:3]

#+END_QUOTE

When He says, "None except the righteous shall partake of this cup", I
believe He is referring to the cup of Revelation, where "partake" means
to understand its real intent. And this to the righteous because they
drink from the camphor fountain (that is, they've purged their hearts
from worldly affections). This theme is addressed later when He writes:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
The understanding of His words and the comprehension of the utterances
of the Birds of Heaven are in no wise dependent upon human learning.
They depend solely upon purity of heart, chastity of soul, and freedom
of spirit.[fn:4]

#+END_QUOTE

Likewise, `Abdu'l-Bahá makes reference to the above verse in the
following prayer:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Call Thou to life those who dwell in their tombs, warn Thou the
prideful, make happiness world-wide, send down Thy crystal waters, and
in the assemblage of manifest splendours, pass round that cup which is
`tempered at the camphor fountain.'[fn:5]

#+END_QUOTE

The idea of detachment would render the meaning of this prayer as "Make
all to be forgetful of the world, purified from lesser interests, and
mindful entirely of Thee". And in another tablet He writes:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Therefore must the desire of the friends be this, to bring together and
unify all peoples, that all may receive a generous drink of this pure
wine from this cup that is `tempered at the camphor fountain.'[fn:6]

#+END_QUOTE

A possibly more explicit reference to "camphor" is given in the
following:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Muhammad-Hádí was loyal always, and he accounted all things other than
God's good pleasure as fiction and fable, nothing more. Blessed is he
for this gift bestowed upon him, glad tidings to him for the place to
which he shall be led; may it do him good, this wine-cup tempered at the
camphor fountain, and may all his strivings meet with thanks and be
acceptable to God.[fn:7]

#+END_QUOTE

Lastly, `Abdu'l-Bahá reports one of the Bábí martyrs as offering these
words in a prayer immediately before his execution:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Thanks be unto Thee that Thou didst succor me and confirm me and didst
give me to drink of this cup that was tempered at the camphor
fountain[fn:8]

#+END_QUOTE

The next verse begins with "`aynaN", meaning "a spring, source, fountain
(also 'eye')". Whether this fountain is related to camphor is unclear.

Bahá'u'lláh refers to this verse -- "a fount whereof the near unto God
shall drink" -- in the Valley of Unity, where He seems to describe the
sufficiency experienced when a person has purified their heart from
limitations and God's light begins to reflect therein.

So, the righteous drink of the camphorated wine, and they also drink
from a fountain whose flow increases by the drinking. My previous
reading would link these two with: “This state is that poverty of which
it is said, 'Poverty is My glory.”'

Both "kaafuuraN" and
"=aynaN" are in the accusative case, kaafuuraN because it is the noun related to "temper", and "=aynaN"
because it is the object of the following phrase ("from which the
righteous shall drink..."). My Arabic does not go much farther than
this, though, so if there is truly a grammatical connection between
these verses, I cannot see it. Can anyone else assist?

I thought perhaps Bahá'u'lláh may have joined "kaafuuraN
=aynaN" (a camphor fountain), but in the original Kitáb-i-Íqán He does not quote the word "=aynaN".
The Guardian decided to translate "fountain" into the reference. And as
I understand it, the wording would have to have been
"=aynaN kaafuuraN" if kaafuur were to be read as an adjective of=aynaN."A
fountain of camphor” would have been "`ayna kaafuuriN".

Question: /What do you think that the camphor fountain refers to?/

I apologize that my previous posts were unclear. I am examining the
possibility that camphor refers to purification and detachment, and that
as a result, one gains access to the heavenly wine of Divine Intention
(expressed most directly in the Covenant). Perhaps all of our suggested
meanings inter-relate.

I also wish to consider the agency of camphor, which has more uses than
fragrance alone. If "camphor fountain" is taken only to mean obedience
to the Covenant, without reference to the agency or qualities of that
obedience, then the following paragraph seems to end in a non-sequitor:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
This is the purpose underlying the symbolic words of the Manifestations
of God. Consequently, the application of the terms "sun" and "moon" to
the things already mentioned hath been demonstrated and justified by the
text of the sacred verses and the recorded traditions. Hence, it is
clear and manifest that by the words "the sun shall be darkened, and the
moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven" is
intended the waywardness of the divines, and the annulment of laws
firmly established by divine Revelation, all of which, in symbolic
language, have been foreshadowed by the Manifestation of God. None
except the righteous shall partake of this cup, none but the godly can
share therein. "The righteous shall drink of a cup tempered at the
camphor fountain."

#+END_QUOTE

At this point in the Íqán, Bahá'u'lláh is discussing the true meanings
of the heavenly allusions, and why the divines have failed to perceive
them. Now, just above He says "... all of which, in symbolic language,
have been foreshadowed by the Manifestation of God". Then immediately
after that He says, "None except the righteous shall partake of this
cup."

He does not mention the Covenant here (or in the paragraphs
surrounding), nor the attractive qualities of the Word of God. When He
says "this cup", I believe He is referring to the preceding discussion
by use of the demonstrative adjective. He then links "this cup" with the
wine-cup mentioned by Muhammad.

Taken in context, "this cup" seems to refer to the true intention of
"the symbolic words of the Manifestations of God", and that "none except
the righteous may partake of this cup". Why? He gives the necessary
qualifications later in the same text:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
The understanding of His words and the comprehension of the utterances
of the Birds of Heaven... depend solely upon purity of heart, chastity
of soul, and freedom of spirit.

#+END_QUOTE

To "partake of this cup", we need purity, chastity, freedom, all of
which imply sanctity (from impurity, defilement and bondage).

Taking the literary uses of "camphor" into account, where it means
either whiteness, fragrance or cooling of the passions (even botanical
guides list it as an anaphrodisiac[fn:9]), it would seem that the third
usage fits very well: that the wine-cup tempered by camphor means that
the vessel of the human heart has been freed from ephemeral attachments,
at which point it is capable of apprehending the manifold meanings of
the Word of God. Compare this with `Abdu'l-Bahá statement in the
commentary on the Sur'ih of Rúm:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Were one of the sincere ones to turn to God in this most great Day and
see with the purest vision, he would understand all of the realities and
meanings of every word of the verses of God, the Eternal Protector --
nay indeed, every letter and every dot.

#+END_QUOTE

Forgive my prolixity, but in reading camphor to indicate "true poverty"
(inner poverty, abandoning all that is not of God), I am offering this
interpretation of the Qur'ánic verse:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Verily, those who hold to justice[fn:10] have purified their hearts by a
draught which has severed their connection to the world, and they now
enjoy the crystal waters of communion with His will, a solace that
increases with every drink.

#+END_QUOTE

Of course, since His will is made manifest most brightly in the
Covenant, this would indeed refer to that "fountain". I am excited to
see this connection; both yours and Patti's letters have helped me find
it. Also, Patti's reference of tempering to fire, which I too quickly
passed over, leads to this additional interpretation of "a wine-cup
tempered by camphor":

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
The wine-cup is the human heart; after being tempered by the fire of
tests and trials, it is touched by the cooling essence of that camphor
which attracts souls into the sheltering shade of the Covenant[fn:11].

#+END_QUOTE

As Patti expressed, there are many layers here, and just playing around
with these few has increased my excitement, and brought me into greater
contact, with verses I had longed considered too mysterious to approach.

Just a brief note on the tempering of metal, since it figures into many
different metaphors.

The process of tempering means to alter behavior or condition by
contributing a new factor. This could be by admixture, pressure, heat,
etc. Burning away impurities, by the way, would indicate a different
process (purification).

In the case of steel, tempering acts as follows: When carbon is
dissolved in liquid iron, and cools sufficiently to be malleable, it is
in a state called "austentite". If it is allowed to cool freely, it will
become "pearlite", which is very weak chemically. The steel molecules
will be randomly arranged, and the metal is neither hard nor strong.

If austentitic steel is quenched -- if its temperature is dropped
quickly -- it forces the steel molecules to solidify into structures
they would not normally select. This is called "martensite" steel, and
is very hard. However, it is also very brittle.

To make martensitic steel strong enough to be useful, while retaining
hardness, it is necessary to "temper" the metal: literally to mellow its
temperament: by heating it up to a temperature less than austentite, but
enough to induce a structural change within the metal. The result is
similar to Rebar embedded in concrete: the iron is fortified by a
latticework of ferrous carbide molecules within the steel.

Once the tempered metal has cooled, it is both hard and strong, which is
the whole purpose for adding the carbon to iron in the first place
(since iron is neither hard nor strong).

[fn:1] Hadhrat Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, Essence of Islam: Vol 2

[fn:2] Bahá'u'lláh, Seven Valleys, pp. 36-7

[fn:3] Bahá'u'lláh, Kitáb-i-Íqán, p. 41

[fn:4] ibid, p. 211

[fn:5] `Abdu'l-Bahá, Selections, p. 254

[fn:6] ibid, p. 278

[fn:7] `Abdu'l-Bahá, Memorials of the Faithful, p. 69

[fn:8] ibid, pp. 177-8

[fn:9] Julia Lawless, Illustrated Encyclopedia of Essential Oils

[fn:10] "He who hath drunk the choice wine of fairness from the hands of
        My bountiful favour will circle around My commandments that
        shine above the Dayspring of My creation." -- Aqdas

[fn:11] "Seek a martyr's death in My path, content with My pleasure and
        thankful for that which I ordain, that thou mayest repose with
        Me beneath the canopy of majesty behind the tabernacle of
        glory." -- Hidden Words
