:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       3A3AE556-6F97-4E7E-B157-D6D066E6F001
:SLUG:     idle-complaint-and-freedom
:END:
---
title: Idle complaint and freedom
tags: journal
---

Something I've been thinking about for several years is the phenomenon
of idle complaint: Complaining to another when no solution can possibly
result. Is it a release valve? A socialized behavior? A personality
trait?

As I spend time with all kinds of people, I am struck by the sheer
volume of idle complaint in the world. If I give a random person my ear,
this is often what they fill it with. Not their hopes, dreams, loves,
desires -- but what drives them crazy, without hope of its changing.
Where does it all come from?

My present idea is that idle complaint represents an attempt to escape a
fundamental moral dilemma posed by freedom: That when faced with any
event, we have two choices: respond or accept. By responding, we act to
change the situation, flee from it, or request change from another; by
accepting, we permit the event to transpire, then return our attention
to the present. The event becomes part of our past, and we face whatever
new events result from it.

However, as clear cut as the situation is -- change things, or don't
change them -- some events cause a psychological withdrawal from the
necessity of choosing. These are things we refuse to accept, but feel
powerless to change. Since we neither act nor accept, the event gets
"stuck" in our response queue, waiting for us to find a solution. I
believe these stuck events cause a mounting sense of anxiety -- a
feeling we've left something undone -- which causes us to play out that
anxiety with others, to lessen the pain. Hence, idle complaint.

The requirements of freedom are harsh and unforgiving: One acts, or
loses the opportunity to act. If one does not act, he must accept; if he
does not accept, he must act. Don't like the way our governments manage
the world? Act. Don't want to act? Accept. There are no other choices --
though the field of action is very wide, and filled with creative
possibilities.

Idle complaint refuses to accept the fact that life owes us nothing. It
does not have to stop, rewind, or undo whatever wrong bothered us. It
moves along, permitting us the freedom to act, but passing right on by
if we don't. For a basic edict of freedom is this: If we don't act,
injustice has as much freedom to continue as our freedom to fight
against it. Complaining that injustice should have no such freedom is
secretly a wish for no freedom at all. Hence the idle complaint, which
asks that the world answer for what happens, without our ever having to
act, or accept it.

In bringing these issues to light, I mean to clarify the extent of our
freedom -- and that of others -- and of our capacity for action. When
you find an issue you care about: Move! Let the others drop. Since no
one can fight every battle, it's OK to accept the atrocities we choose
not to fight against (by "accept", I mean acknowledge their freedom to
occur, not that one morally agree with their content). Where there is
both acceptance and action, we put our freedom to use. It's only idle
complaint that absorbs huge sums of energy without return. It's even
worse than accepting, though it feels like an active stance. For
everything has been allowed its freedom: this, at the root of it, is why
we can never expect the world to act differently than it does: we can
only choose to accept things, or act to change them.
