:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       8B601864-F1A0-455F-A1FC-10C9A1B8E73D
:SLUG:     religion-and-authority
:END:
#+filetags: :essays:
#+title: Religion and authority

Is religion an authority in life? Are humans meant to explore truth
individually, personally, or is it the place of religion to dictate
truth to us?

It is my understanding that religion, with respect to the inward aspect
of the individual, represents no authority: that although socially
religion may have a purpose, it makes no demands of the heart. In fact,
such freedom of spirit is essential to what it means to be human.

The course of this essay depends on the meaning of two words:
"authority" and "law". As such, a bit of definition is in order. These
are only attempted definitions, but perhaps from example a clearer
picture will arise.

- Authority is the capacity and intention to exercise power in pursuit
  of a goal.
- Law, in the absolute sense, is a condition of existence; in the
  relative sense, it is the dictims of authority.

In pursuit of its goal, an authority exhibits two major characteristics:
the restraint of personal liberty, and response to challenge using
force. Since relative laws only express the will of an authority, they
do not possess attributes /per se/. But absolute law -- or natural law
-- has the distinct characteristic that it is inviolable within its
scope. One must decide what relationship one will have to it; it does
not dictate, or determine anything relative to the subject. It is
entirely without motive, which is something possessed in high degree by
both relative laws and their governing authority.

Governments are a typical example of an authority. In the pursuit of
their goal, putatively social welfare, they exercise power to keep
citizens within the bounds of their law. Yet these same attributes can
be found in the gardener, or the teacher: anywhere that artificial rules
(i.e., relative laws) are imposed to produce a desired effect.

Authority itself seems to be neither good nor bad. If the laws it
proclaims are healthy, and its aim a good one, the result will be good.
But if the laws are inappropriate, or the aim evil, the result will
likewise be evil.

Without authority there would be no exercise of power. Life would be an
agglomeration of unintended forces and blind instinct. The moment we
begin making decisions and applying them, we are exercising our power
and asserting our authority to make those changes to some degree.

But despite the useful nature of power, there exists a dimension in
human life where it never exerts a beneficial influence. Consider the
artist. In the field of painting she represents an authority through her
control of form and color. By following certain inner, ethereal guides,
her brush can produce whatever goal her imagination desires. For the
sake of simplicity, let's say our artist has chosen beauty for her
subject. And by a good hand and a willing brush, picture such an example
standing before you now.

Is there any authority imaginable which can decide your appreciation?

Someone may command you to act kindly, but can they demand your love of
kindness? Neither can they decide another's faith, or happiness, or
their heart's desire. For the human heart is exempt from all authority.

Which is not to say it is exempt from the laws governing its existence!
For this is what I believe one purpose of religion to be: the education
of man as to the laws governing his spirit.

A true law cannot be contravened, but it can be used. Gravity prevents
us from jumping to the moon, but proper use of physical laws has allowed
us to fly there. So although the spirit cannot escape its own reality,
it can profit and develop through an understanding of its nature.

Yet, the expression of a natural law bears no relationship to any
authority. An authority voices relative laws, laws specific to its
purpose. Natural laws deal with the fabric of reality itself. Parents
tell their children that gravity holds them to the Earth. But is this a
command that it must be so? There is a distinct difference between
elucidation and command. No physicist has ever been accused of playing
the tyrant.

Furthermore, authority is always in pursuit of a goal, whereas natural
laws exist of themselves. Men can either profit through the knowledge of
them, or suffer the consequences of ignorance. Never do they seek to win
first place in our hearts; the reaction we chose determines our
relationship to them.

Religion has parts of both of these. With regard to the individual, it
reveals to us the secrets of our own nature; with regard to society, it
seeks to unify us by threatening reward and punishment, the trademarked
tools of any authority.

Since the latter involves material reality, and I've already said that
the use of authority is required for progress, I won't question
religious authority in that respect. But I would like to see what more
can be rooted out in the first case, that of religion's message to the
individual.

Our love for anything cannot be decided. To do so, for whatever purpose,
would be the act of an authority which has chosen our love as one of its
operating criteria. Even when our conscious mind tries to play that
role, it fails. Love is a spontaneous production of the heart, dependent
on sensitivity and circumstance, not will.

It makes no sense, therefore, to believe that God has decreed for us to
love Him. Perhaps He has created us in order that such love might exist,
but it must come about through the pureness of one's heart contacting
the very thing that heart most desires.

If spiritual law says that God is perfect beauty, and that He cannot be
seen until we open our eyes, is that a command? Why would an omnipotent
being have any need to command, if he could have created us without
lids?

Authority exercises power to dominate, because without power its goal
could not otherwise be achieved. God, on the other hand, if He is
omnipotent, all-possessing, incomparable, has no need to invoke power.
His station is the root of dominus: Lord. Why exert power to dominate,
if your very being betokens Lordship?

Therefore, in the relationship between believer and Lord, there is no
question of authority. The affairs of men may always need some beating
into shape, but the human heart is a thing to flower, not to mold. For
One Who could have created us in any image, He chose His Own: that we
might reach out across the immensity of ignorance by our volition, and
learn through that experience to appreciate the beauty of His creation.
