:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       76F0C917-325B-44E7-A87D-184F96829955
:SLUG:     mind-and-the-individual
:END:
---
title: '"Mind" and the individual'
tags: journal
---

People living in America seem to place too great an emphasis on the
"mind" in the life of the individual. I have made this statement several
times to many people, and especially the younger generation seems to
object with varying arguments. Perhaps those who have the most future
left to them want to imagine that future as highly controllable. This
control is meant more in terms of inward condition than of external
events. After all, how is an individual to find happiness? If happiness
is truly an obscure state arrived at by non-intellectual means, then to
an intellectual it appears vague and unattainable. But if it can be
imagined as the logical result of a cognizable sequence of steps, there
is at least some hope for the future even if the present does not share
in that future state. The cognizable possibility of achieving the state
of happiness appears to be paramount; unless it is rationally
foreseeable, life transmogrifies into something too haphazard to be
manageable.

This, I feel, is a naive attempt to reduce the true complexity of life.
We as a species have merely begun to live. There are countless thousands
of years of development ahead of us, and how can we imagine to have
completed most of it with the remainder just a refinement of
already-discovered processes? I believe that there are critical, basic
elements to the understanding of our selves which we have not yet even
discovered. These elements will be viewed in the future as requisite to
a proper understanding of the human mind. But at the present time we
possess only a handful of insights; what is most important for us now is
that we view these understandings in the appropriate light, otherwise we
allow our own immaturity as a species to hold us back from further
development.

One philosopher stated that the fundamental flaw in any
over-intellectual thinker is that he comes to conclusions too rapidly
and finally. If our tendency were to hold off conclusions until the last
possible moment, it would afford our thought processes a much needed
flexibility. The core premise is that we are like children, and
furthermore that thought is not the foremost faculty of human
experience.
