:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       ED99F803-4927-4E10-A2D4-470AE4E2E8E7
:SLUG:     the-faith-dynamic
:END:
---
title: The Faith Dynamic
tags: essays
---

Quantum mechanics indicates that for all physical events on the
subatomic level there exist multiple probable outcomes, and that each of
these outcomes exists simultaneously until interference with an outside
observer causes one of those possibilities to become the outcome
observed. We are always aware of only a single outcome; but since other
outcomes were also probable, what caused the choice of one over the
other?

Classical physics offered a deterministic model in which all effects
follow from the previous state according to physical laws: that the
reason for every effect is explained by its cause. The nature of
subatomic particles, however, is that multiple probable effects can
occur from a single cause. The fact that only one is observed implies
some sort of selection.

How does this selection occur? Probability indicates a purely random
basis for selection, in which it is as equally likely for one outcome to
occur as another. This precludes both determinism and free will: the
former because we can no longer determine what the observed outcome will
be, and the latter because we cannot choose the outcome selected. We are
like a boat caught in a stream that leads us whichever way the waters
go; and while we can steer the boat in the general direction of the
flow, we cannot go wherever we wish.

If the process of selection among quantum states is random, then we live
in a random universe governed by laws that constrain the randomness
enough that large-scale concepts of continuity are possible. Although
the motion of an electron follows no predictable path, yet the laws of
electromagnetic attraction keep it bound within the atom's structure.
The randomness of its movement does not prevent the atom from interact
consistently with other atoms to create the impression of a solid
object. The selection of one state over another happens at fine enough a
level that we fail to perceive our universe as being built upon a
framework of chance. It seems to be chance happening within a scheme of
laws that make one outcome as likely to produce a viable world as
another. The world we see, then, is a consequence of untold happy
accidents; neither determined by an initial set of events, nor governed
by any intention it follow a specific path. Even if the probability of
any event could be influenced by external interference, the final choice
is still random, and might be the same as if there had been no
interference at all. Our universe was simply likely to occur, and
because we now see it, is proof that it did occur.

Considered as a physical system, the underlying randomness of events has
selected a universe in which beings exist who strive against randomness.
Random selection implies an even distribution of probabilities, so that
even if occasional interference alters specific probabilities, the
overall, net effect is still random. It favors an entropy in which rare
outcomes remain rare and are never more likely to be selected than what
is less rare. Life, however, consistently makes choices that follow a
specific plan, and thus counteract the random nature of the universe
that spawned it. We fight against entropy by creating order, even though
we say that entropy led to our creation. If life creates order, and
randomness creates entropy, then how did the universe select life?
Although a random system is bound to make a rare choice, how it choose
something which begins to make its own choices in a fashion directly
opposed to its parent? How did randomness come to offer the gift of
intention?

It is obvious that our current universe was possible. Whether it was
improbable or not depends on whether selection actually chooses one
state among others, or if all possible states occur in separate
universes, each one imagining its own outcome as the one chosen. If this
is the case, and we are equally conscious in all possible worlds,
probability has no meaning. Even though one outcome be extremely remote,
still it will occur, and the inhabitants of that universe will be as
conscious of their result, as we of ours. Probability could not mean
that we rarely see any one outcome, as we would see all possible
outcomes, always. It only means that the history of any universe --
revealed by its probability patterns -- indicates how often it chose
among certain possibilities.

An example of such revelatory patterns is the stock broker's con: A
group of thirty-two people are picked, with sixteen told that certain
stock will rise, and the other sixteen that it will fall. After the
stock moves, the sixteen who were rightly informed are again divided,
with eight told it will rise, and eight that it will fall. This is
continued until one is person is left who perceives the broker as having
a flawless understanding of the market.

If each person in this example is a universe, consider how he sees the
broker: to the first sixteen people who were given bad information, the
broker appears no worse off than anyone else: a fifty-fifty chance of
giving the right advice. But as the broker chooses among the group of
people, others begin to alter their perception of him. Each time the
broker chooses the odds remain the same, but the history of his choices
seem to weight the probability that his next choice will also be good.
What's more, in setting up the con this way, it is always guaranteed
that at least one person will experience the broker as always having
made the correct decision. He is likely then to conceive a higher
probability of continued success.

If we too are also following multiple worldlines at every turn, we
should be experiencing a similar thing with regard to physical laws.
Consider a quantum event with a low probability, such as proton decay.
In one worldline the proton did decay, and in that worldline another
followed in which another decayed, etc. Since it is always possible for
a proton to decay, there is always a worldline in which it did decay --
no matter how many times previously it had already been seen to decay.
In such a worldline, proton decay is not improbable at all, but common;
in fact, in at least one worldline, proton decay must always occur,
since this exists as a possibility. There proton decay is not only
likely, but a constant phenomenon; while here it is so improbable as to
remain undetected. Though improbable is the wrong word to describe this:
The perception of probability is the quantum history for each particular
universe.

This applies to physical laws, where certain possibilities are given a
probability of zero: Here, those possibilities never occurred, giving
rise to a law explaining their absence; but if probability has no
meaning, then other universes exist which violate that law, where the
law does not exist and is replaced by an expression of probability, the
way we describe other events in terms of probabilities. There cannot be
absolute physical laws if there are multiple worldlines: only
descriptive histories that reflect, in the form of physical law, the
continued non-occurrence of certain possibilities.

Even if consciousness does not carry into multiple worldlines, and some
process of selection, random or otherwise, constantly chooses one
reality over another, the implication still holds: It is the function of
that choice creating the history of our universe from which we derive
the concepts of stability and law ascribed to physical phenomena.
Whatever we term as law or constant is but a description of what was
chosen before us.

The improbability of certain outcomes gives rise to question now of why
they are improbable, since quantum mechanics computes their probability
by using physical laws. It is only a problem in the single worldline
model, where randomness is randomly choosing between alternatives whose
distribution is not random at all. Physical law seems to fix the
probability of specific occurrences, allowing the choice to be random
but claiming that the context of choice is not. However, if physical law
is an outcome of the selections experienced by our universe, it cannot
be used to describe the nature of the selection process itself. This
leaves a selection process that appears random in its choices, while
being non-random in the distribution of those choices. Physical law
describes these preferences in terms of probabilities, but other than
accept them as universal constants, it does not explain why a random
process should be constrained in a non-random way. If the multiple
worldlines view holds, the reason is purely historical; but if one
worldline is being selected, it would seem that the physical laws have
been chosen by whatever process now chooses randomly under their aegis.

This discrepancy of behavior in the case of a single worldline is enough
to suggest the possibility of an intention to create the universe now
experienced -- framed in what we call physical laws, and constantly
directed by the aggregate choices made at the subatomic level. And if
there is intention behind these choices, it implies a conscious
framework directing them for whom one outcome is better than another for
reasons entirely specific to that consciousness. What we know as the
universe was created, and has been constantly maintained and directed,
to the end of yielding a place where independent wills have the capacity
to add their own intention to the mix.

The idea that our present universe was created by an active will making
choices at the quantum level would give such an agency absolute freedom
to act without respect to what we know as laws. Further, if the
appearance of life in our universe was a gift of this agency --
imparting the intention to counteract entropy in a system that
by-and-large operates by expressing itself through probabilities -- and
if perfect awareness exists on the part of that agency, which is
indicated by its ability to effect universal scale results by operations
in the smallest domain, then perhaps our intentions are read by this
agency and effected by means of cooperative changes on its behalf. For
example, if one intends to raise his arm in the air, it raises; but
while the process of raising can be explained by medicine, the
relationship of pure thought to the physical events necessary to move an
arm cannot be. But if intention is heard by the same agency that selects
the worldline we experience, the motion of one's arm is explained as a
chain of possible events beginning with some quantum-scale choice that
would not have been made had one not expressed the intention.

This relationship between our contingent will, and an absolute Will Who
governs the course of the universe, would explain the mechanism of
prayer: By expressing our intention, we call upon the willingness of
that Agency to select a worldline in which our prayer is answered. From
this point forward I will simply call that agency God. For whatever
reason, God has willed a universe in which the physical laws seem to
hold, though this does not mean that any such laws exist in any other
form than a consistency of choosing on His part. This explains miracles,
since although God seems to prefer consistency in the matter of physical
laws -- a plain induction -- it seems the intentions of saints are
cherished even more. Religious scripture indicates that the greater
one's faith, the more one attracts unworldly powers to himself. If these
powers are a willingness on the part of God to select improbable
outcomes within our worldline, then faith can be viewed as the
fulfillment of intention, which functions on the basic level to move the
limbs of our body, and on the highest to cause the selection of
improbable quantum states, such as Christ's promise of the ability to
move mountains.

Further, there is no difference other than choice, and acceptance of the
choice by God, between the changes that move mountains, and those that
move an arm. Because we tend to think of physical law as inviolate, and
physical mobility as resulting from our own, private volition, we find
it difficult to imagine events arising without reasonable causes.
Quantum mechanics allows for such possibilities however, even within our
scheme of physical law, such that acts of faith are more improbable than
they are impossible. And if something is merely improbable, then it
falls upon the process of selection to choose whether we experience in
our worldline. If God wills it, we shall; and so it becomes as likely
than an individual of faith will influence that selection, as for it
never to occur if no one asks. The key element is that the world we
experience is brought into being, moment to moment, by the intention of
a Will Who hears our thoughts. The faith dynamic is that our thoughts
and prayers can influence the same decision making process by which this
creation was brought into being. It does not run counter to physical
law, but appeals to the common parent of law and miracle both.

An individual of pure intention, then, with complete faith in God's
ability to effect whatever outcome He desires, and fulfilling whatever
criteria God considers when granting a prayer, has the conditional
ability to shape our worldline. This ability is the utmost, consummate
power, since it draws upon the same agency Who created the universe. The
power of faith is limited only by God's willingness to heed its call;
and since His power is not in any way limited, there is no reason to put
a limit on faith. Insofar as a thing is possible, whether or not it is
probable, it may be granted, since there is no law God must adhere to in
considering its fulfillment.

If God stands behind the chain of events, with our universe the direct
expression of His will in the modality of physical creation, then the
faith dynamic add another element to human consciousness in this
creation: To affect the shaping of the worldline through acts of will,
the degree of effect being proportional to one's faith. The more one has
faith -- which includes trusting God, and keeping faith in the covenant
by which God may trust him -- the more one's contingent powers will be,
and the more fully they will exist as a being of spirit, than merely the
physical carriage of that spirit. "O My Servant! Obey Me and I shall
make thee like unto Myself. I say
=Be,' and it is, and thou shalt say=Be,' and it shall be."[fn:1]

[fn:1] Bahá'u'lláh, The Four Valleys, p. 63
