:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       C9A39772-EA90-4CAF-9E31-1094EC79E731
:SLUG:     our-relationship-with-god
:END:
---
title: Our relationship with God
tags: essays
---

A relationship with any living thing involves a certain degree of
mystery, since there is a capriciousness inherent in living things: an
unknown quantity. It is this unknown which allows for new creations to
appear -- both good and bad.

Human beings have difficulty with the unknown, because it's impossible
to predict whether it will be positive or negative. In fact, anything
obscure, mysterious, or strange, provokes a certain displeasure in the
conscious mind; the mind simply wants to /know/.

When faced with an unknown, the mind will "invent" knowledge as a way of
coping: a kind of "temporary knowledge" which can mollify the awful
mystery of things, at least for a while. We see this trait very
beneficially employed in the sciences, where it is used to formulate new
theories, describe natural behavior, etc.

But this trait is far more pervasive than being used in just the
sciences; it is not confined to only hypotheses which are employed to
help explain the physical universe. Everything unknown has a belief
system associated with it to help us deal with our ignorance. For
example, we presume that the future will take a certain course, in order
that we can predict with a feeling of relative certainty where we will
be in two days, or two weeks; we use classifications and stereotypes to
help us demystify the opposite sex, foreign cultures, other
nationalities, etc.

In the face of the grandest Unknown, we make the baldest assumptions of
all. There is nothing so perfectly beyond our grasp as the essence of
God's mystery. Yet the fact that we even mention His name during
discussion betrays a puzzling paradox. Lao Tzu said it very succinctly:
"The truth that can be talked about is not the Eternal Truth; the name
which can be named is not the Eternal Name."

It is a tricky problem to realize that the belief systems which we
invent are not identical with the mysteries they attempt to clarify.
Newton's laws of gravity, for example, do not give us any knowledge
about gravity itself. They represent a series of beliefs which happily
coincide with the behavior of some unknown quantity, to such a degree
that we can put those observations to practical use. But they do not
inform; they only describe.

Likewise, our feeling of a stable tomorrow, based on the experience of
so many yesterdays, is equally flawed. We do not know -- we can never
know -- what will come tomorrow. All we have is a weak set of beliefs to
shield us from the terrible uncertainty of the future.

The fact that these opinions about reality seem to work relatively well
is both a blessing and a curse. The blessing is that they allow us to
move forward, and to advance ever farther into the domain of the
undiscovered. The tragedy is that we implicitly, after years of
confirmation and familiarity, begin to mistake these opinions for truth.
Once this occurs -- when an opinion, bearing only a shadow-resemblance
to truth, is misconstrued as the truth itself -- then any future
knowledge, if it does not resemble as our tried-and-true opinions, is
misunderstood to be false.

Gravity was so well described by Newton, that people began to assume
that his description must be close to the truth. But opinions have
nothing to do with truth, except maybe as a mirror which reflects the
light, or a lantern that carries light into the dark regions of the
world. When Einstein presented his fundamental idea that gravity was not
a true force, but merely a phenomenon resulting from a curvature in
space-time, perhaps the flame was a little brighter, but the lantern had
changed. People looked at the new lantern, housing Einstein's theory,
and they compared it to Newton's. Finding that they were hugely
dissimilar, and because Newton's ideas had been mistaken for truth,
Einstein was rejected.

Fortunately for science, it is possible to devise experiments that allow
two, differing theories to be compared. It was discovered ultimately
that space-time does curve, and people then accepted that Newton's
theory was just a working approximation, meant for only low-gravity
situations.

But what about our more intangible beliefs, which are not so easy to
prove or disprove? Our ideas about the future are so firmly rooted, for
example, that we plan our lives according to how we think things will be
twenty years down the road. How can we convince ourselves that this is
only a working model, suitable only for rough guesses?

Or what about God. Everything that hides behind that word represents the
roughest approximation of all. If we find ourselves considering for a
moment that when we talk about God we are really talking about God, we
should shrink away in horror. What can we possibly mean when we utter
that word, "God"? We have no direct experience with the Unexperiencable.
The finite cannot embrace the Infinite. At best, we use that word as it
was used by the Prophets, but even Their language is one of utter
mystery on that subject.

The relationship that we have with God, and which is strengthened and
deepened by religion, is one of perfect mystery. We simply cannot know.
Yet the mind is horrified by not knowing, so /something/ must be
invented to fill the vacuum.

This invention I would call our private ideologies. We take in what our
culture says, what the Holy Books declare, what our life teaches us, and
what our hearts confirm; and we distill from this mixture a kind of
woefully incomplete conception that we then give the name of "God". We
imagine we know -- at least, according to our ideology -- when this
fictitious being is angry with us, pleased with us, what He wants us to
do, not do, etc.

The really bizarre piece of this puzzle is that our conception of God --
which we invented as a way of at least beginning to approach Him -- is
what keeps us farther away than anything else. Because the real God is
at all times so radically different from the picture in our minds, that
even if He were to knock on our front door, we wouldn't stand the
slightest chance of recognizing Him.

Consider the past. People prayed day and night, devoted their lives to
anticipating the coming of the Messiah, and then killed Him when He
arrived. Mullá Husayn, one of the foremost, most dedicated followers of
Siyyid Kázim, failed to recognize the Báb until He Himself made it plain
Who He was. These people did not have an aversion to the truth. Many of
them were intelligent, thoughtful, and devoted. But they had presumed
their ideas to be, due to the weight of tradition and evidence, equal to
the truth itself. This had the result of making the actual truth, when
it came again in another form, foreign to them.

We as human beings are never able to deal with the truth directly. Since
we are finite, we are condemned to relate to truth through a thick veil.
Every philosopher of the past has attempted to penetrate this barrier;
every mystic has defied himself, striving to clear away this final
obstruction. But for as long as we remain finite, our understanding will
be finite, and therefore the very best we can do is to develop opinions
which will bring us ever closer to the truth.

For this progression to occur we must forever be abandoning the old to
accept the new. As Lao Tsu observed, "Keep empty and you will be
filled." It is by learning to cultivate emptiness that we prepare
ourselves for the influx of new ideas. In this pursuit, even our most
sacred assumptions must be cast off for the sham they are (in comparison
to truth). They may serve us for a while, and act as a guide along the
way, but once they begin to mislead us they become our worst liability.

The essence of our relationship to truth is one of embracing mystery,
and of accepting the unknown. This does not mean that we empty our minds
of opinion -- since we use those opinions to relate to the outside world
-- but that we realize the nature of what we call "knowledge". When we
accept that the content of our brains is essentially meaningless in the
face of the Unknown, then we can discover a new flexibility which will
allow us to free ourselves from these old opinions -- in order to
embrace new ones -- at an ever increasing rate. In this way, we may each
day discover a new mystery.

There is no blame to be given for mistaking opinions as truth. This is a
natural propensity of the human mind. But we must accustom our tastes to
the unknown, for the mystery of Who God really is is something that we
would never guess in a million years.

Fortunately, we are given a starting point, and guideposts along the
way, by the Messengers of God. In their language, we are taught the
disciplines necessary, and the evidences to look for, to guide us along
this darkest of paths. To a perfect eye it may be "the Straight Path",
but we begin it blind, and with no ability adequately to judge our
progress.

Those outside the Faith often look at the ideologies developed and
proposed by others, and realize how untrue they are (in the strict sense
of "true"). Yet, at the same time, they also suffer the mistake of
confusing those descriptions with the thing described. And so, in
rejecting these fallacious assumptions made by all of us about the
nature of God, they unfortunately also turn away from any further
contemplation on what the truth of God's existence might be.

We all fall into this trap. None of us, by calling ourselves a believer,
is freed from the constant error we make in assuming that we truly know
anything. It is only a tragedy that the words "faith", "religion", and
"God" have become so misrepresented that the world is no longer
interested. But these words have no relation to the realities they
attempt to describe, except as guesses made by very innocent creatures!
We are all innocent, when the true depth of these things is weighed in
the balance. What knowledge can we have? Then it is up to each
individual to determine for him or herself whether these words have any
truth behind them. Though the belief may be utterly false, what it is
based on might genuinely exist.

This is the question the world must ask: not "does the God described by
religion really exist?", because that God does not exist: He is only a
description, devoid of life; rather, we must ask: "does religion point
to a further understanding of what life is really about?" The issue of
God will naturally come up during such an investigation, but "knowing
God" is not what religion is about. Religion seeks only to further the
spiritualization of men and mankind. It claims that our life does not
end in death, and that the significance of this world will be discovered
later. Is this true? Are there any tests that can be applied to validate
these assumptions?

Those are the critical questions, I believe. If we focus on God, and
whether or not He exists, we are asking a question which can never be
answered truthfully, since "the name which can be named is not the
Eternal Name". The moment we debate God, we are merely playing with the
vain conceptions of an ignorant species.

It is the significance of the question -- what it implies -- that
deserves our attention. The value of Newton's laws had nothing to do
with gravity, or whether gravity truly existed. The importance lay in
the impact that those laws had on society. That those laws reflected a
glimmer of the truth was only a beautiful detail; instead, their value
lay in their efficacy, or relative value to society. And the value to
science was that it allowed us to plumb the depths a little deeper.

Religion does relate to God, but it does not offer us an understanding
of Him -- nor does it try to. The value of religion is that it is the
only agency which can universely transform the hearts of men; while its
future value is that it introduces us, step by step, into a further
understanding of the meaning of life, and the role of our selves and the
Creator. But we do not know these things; we only opine. We opine, and
we labor to better ourselves, that some day we might appreciate the
Great Mysteries to a fuller degree.

Hence the essence of any living relationship -- of ourselves to God, or
of our minds to truth -- lies in accepting the fundamental mystery that
we can never ultimately know the truth of anything. All of it is just a
working hypothesis -- however stable its foundation might be -- and
should be discarded as soon as we outgrow it.

The world looks at some of our older conceptions of "God" and
"religion", and turns away in disgust. Who can blame them? If I thought
these ideas were attempting to describe the truth of the matter, I would
run as fast as I could. But the real issue lies elsewhere. Reject the
conception, but don't discard the concept. Forget the package it came
in, but do try to discover the meaning of the gift. There is more to be
found here -- by everyone. The question is: how far will your efforts
take you?
