:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       5C4ECBE9-A461-422A-8826-3FABB3F3FB06
:SLUG:     the-process-of-learning-and-mystical-pursuit
:END:
---
title: The process of learning and mystical pursuit
tags: essays
---

In her essay on faná' and baqá'[fn:1], Alison Marshall wrote:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
After coming down from faná' [the state in which the self is
annihilated], a person passes into a state called "baqá"', which is
'living in God' or 'God living in us'. Izutsu explains that in the state
of baqá', the person is reawakened to the 'multiplicity' of the world,
after being 'extinguished' in the state of faná'. But now the person
sees the world with new eyes; whereas before she saw only the many
created things, now she can also see the One that is behind everything.
It could be said that the person has a permanent vision of unity in
diversity...

#+END_QUOTE

Compare this experience with what happens when we learn something:
Before a person learns a subject, it appears very diverse to them. For
example, someone looking at computers is mystified by how it could ever
make sense to the programmer.

The programmer, who understands how a computer works, knows that at its
heart it functions using incredibly few principles. In fact, there is
really only one principle at work in a computer: the distinction between
presence and absence. This distinction can be combined, multiplied,
directed, converted into magnetic force -- in millions and billions of
ways. But at its heart the computer is a unity, whose incredible
complexity is the revelation of this unified law in all its varied
possibilities.

As a person starts learning about computers, they begin to see how many
things that looked separate and complex before are actually united and
simple. It takes a while to understand how this is so, but the process
of learning continually reduces the "many" to the "one". For example,
there are hundreds of computer languages; yet, they all do very nearly
the same thing. After a while, it's possible to learn a new language
just by asking how it differs from the old. In fact, most new languages
hardly have anything new in them at all; they just recombine the same
ideas into a form that is easier to use for a new purpose.

After enough research and delving into the field of computers, perhaps
someday one goes far enough to achieve the "Grand Vision". This is
understanding how everything fits together, in every respect. It is not
so difficult to achieve as you'd think, and there are signs of it in
every single computer program. But seeing how this essential unity
underlies the scheme of computers, without studying, is impossible.

In its diversity the computer is the "most manifest of the manifest",
since everything proceeds from that united heart; but in its unity it is
the "most hidden of the hidden", because nowhere is this concept present
in its naked form. Everything one learns is an inference, a derived
idea, a consequence of an ever-more-profound understanding. Philosophy
would say that the details of the computer transcend toward its central
motivating idea, but since the idea is never immanent in everyday
reality, no one but a student of computers can ever truly comprehend it.

Finally the student reaches down to the bottom of the well, and puts it
all together. It's not so hard, really. It's just the interaction
between presence and absence. One could even say, "Knowledge is a single
point, but the ignorant have multiplied it". Anyway, from the day the
programmer achieves this understanding, and every day forward, the
computer now looks different to him. When he looks at it he sees the
same machine as everyone else, but he now sees each individual aspect of
the computer as a manifestation of that essential oneness. It is this
oneness that attracts him, that now aids him in understanding each new
detail he ever learns about the computer. It redefines his relationship
to that entire field of knowledge, and makes it all seem familiar,
understood, close at hand.

Thus the state of a consummate programmer is one of constantly beholding
unity in diversity, the one in the many. It's as though all computers
(all programs, all operating systems, all architectures) are just
variations on a Theme, a theme he finds beautiful beyond description in
the elegance of its simplicity. It is, of course, too simple to ever
explain, even given hours and days and an eager listener. It can never
be shared, never talked about. One can speak volumes about it, but not
suffice to capture the mystery of that one Truth about the computer
world. There are some who catch a hint of this mystery, and pursue it
until they find it; while others don't have the time and desire it takes
to reach that far. For some it takes decades to reach it, for others
just months, or maybe they are graced with the capacity to intuit the
whole thing in a single statement. One can never say.

But truly, computers are wonderfully simple, and in this respect a
programmer will always say it's really not so hard; that we're just one
step away from the essence of what we seek. This unity is the basis of
every action the computer takes, it's present in every feature. Without
it, what it means to compute would fade away into nothingness. For the
programmer, this unity is bliss, and the means of greater and more rapid
understandings than he could ever achieve from the point of view of
diversity. He can now sit behind a foreign computer, a foreign program
-- never having seen or heard of it before -- and in moments start to
interact profitably with it, since he has a feeling for what computers
do, how they behave, what to expect from them. Everything is familiar
territory. In a single menu, he descries the nature and design of the
whole; from a single glance, he can judge by his intimate association
with the Secret, how it derives its meaning from that Source.

[fn:1] [[http://bahai-library.org/unpubl.articles/fana.marshall.html]]
