:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       1D85CDE5-C690-4EEC-AEDF-9802718B534C
:SLUG:     a-spiritual-playground
:END:
---
title: A spiritual playground
tags: journal
---

If the world around us is a living metaphor for the world of the spirit,
then in the relationships we have here, perhaps there is something to be
discerned of our soul's connection to the All.

Christ referred to God as the Father, and the believers as His children.
I find this image very rich, because it describes a bond of love, and a
scenario in which the Parent creates a loving environment for His child
to grow. If God is the Father, and this world that environment, then
what does that imply?

Children are engaged in two principles activities as they develop:
learning and play. They work too, but hopefully not too much or for too
long. We enact laws to prevent this. Too much work robs the child of his
childhood; enough work teaches him the meaning of responsibility. There
is a balance to be struck.

I believe I am a child of the spirit. This life, like a womb, is a
matrix for the development of my higher capacities. Watching over me is
a loving Father Who guides my development, but does not interfere. If we
pay too much attention to children, or give them the answers, they do
not learn for themselves -- which is one of their principle activities.
If I am a spiritual child, and this world is my first home, then perhaps
I, too, have two basic impulses to explore: to learn and to play. There
is work, chores, to do, but never so much as to dim my spirit.

What would it mean to learn and play spiritually? I am still learning
these things. I find that such learning increases my vision, which
engenders virtue, while play is the exploration of my spiritual powers,
such as imagination, creativity, invention, and dreams. These are what
inspire me, and make me feel amazement at being alive.

There is nothing to say that what earns us money is not also play, in
this sense. These two elements exist on separate levels: the material
activity and the spiritual. What is important is that the path we choose
for ourselves fit our needs as immature beings: that we allow for making
mistakes, remember the value of joy, and never lose sight of the fact
that life is essentially a thing of wonder and mystery.

The importance of this idea -- of recognizing that we are "as little
children" -- has to do with the plans we make for ourselves and the
guidance we give others. If we create an atmosphere in ignorance of the
realities of childhood, growth and development may be inhibited. If
school and society are too Draconian in their demands, we know it
hinders innovation and creativity. If we are too hard on ourselves, we
restrict our willingness to try new things, or to change in unexpected
ways. This world is intended for our education; we must look to its
needs in those terms.

If a community of children were to design a plan of activity intended
for adults, it would fail to engage the interest of its members. This
happens because what works for adults does not serve children. So if in
fact we are children spiritually, things here should have more the
character of a playground, and a school, than a place for the endeavors
of maturity. To regard it otherwise is to take our lives and our efforts
far too seriously, too soon. We end up constantly chastising ourselves
for our failures and shortcomings.

If this metaphor describes our relation to life, then our first
objective is to learn, and the second is to explore with joy the
possibilities of our nature. These two activities increase spirit and
cause upliftment. Anything more grave than this, I fear, will lead to
weariness, and a simple longing to free. Can that be right? Treat a
child as an adult, and he takes no genuine interest in his life. He does
what he must, but only because he "should". Yet if you let a child
explore his childhood, he will naturally find his way to joy. It is
natural for a child to be happy. They possess an inherent exuberance at
being alive. I think our souls, too, share this feeling, whenever we
safeguard the requirements of its nature.

If we see ourselves as little children, perhaps we can better understand
the value of this existence, and find it easier to fulfill our purpose.
We are babes in a mystical sandbox, youth in a spiritual playground,
only beginning to discern the purpose for our being. We have chores to
accomplish, and laws from the Parent to follow, but otherwise let us
enjoy the infancy in our soul's existence, and take pleasure in the
opportunities of life.
