:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       7AE0BE29-96F7-42EC-AB21-F4858CFCDB80
:SLUG:     nickels-and-dimes
:END:
#+filetags: :essays:
#+title: Nickels and dimes

When we make choices in this life, do we make them based on knowledge,
or something else? While reading a book lately, an image came to mind
which perhaps underscores the importance of a continued study of Life,
since we are always in a position of making choices, and how we make
them can often alter our lives permanently-for better or for worse.

Imagine a closed room with two piles of coins. To your left, one million
dimes; to your right, one million nickels. Between the two is a man who
tells you that can choose either one or the other. Whichever you choose
will be deposited into your bank account immediately-all taxes paid, and
no fees attached.

Which do you choose?

A stack of ten dimes is about half an inch high. A row of ten dimes is
seven and a half inches long. One million is 100 x 100 x 100, or five
inches tall by seventy-five inches square. That's almost a half-foot
high, by over six feet square.

A stack of ten nickels is just under three-quarters of an inch high,
with a row of ten being eight and three-quarters long. For a million
nickels, that's two-thirds of a foot by seven and a third-foot square.

To a child, which of the piles appears more valuable? To a five-year
old, the bigger pile (the nickels) obviously seems like "more money",
because it is more money in the sense that it represents a larger weight
in coinage.

If the man between the coins asked the child which stack he wanted, he
would probably pick the nickels. Even if an adult were to tell him that
the dimes were worth more, would he believe it? And if he then happened
to make the right choice-because he trusted the adult-would he
understand why? Wouldn't his heart still be torn? Wouldn't there still
be a fear that he may have made the wrong decision?

An adult would never choose the less valuable pile, because it would be
foolish to do so. There is no reason, if the money is being given
freely, to choose the lesser amount. Further, when the adult makes his
or her decision, it will be bereft of fear, because the adult has no
doubt that he or she is making the correct choice based on sound,
mathematical reasoning.

This, I believe, emphasizes the difference between: (a) ignorance, (b)
knowledge that has been told to us, and (c) knowledge that has been
validated through true understanding.

In the first situation-that of the child who has been given no
assistance-the basis of the child's decision is determined by outward
semblances: because the nickels appear larger, they must be worth more.

In the second, after the child has been warned, he has still not yet
discovered the reality of the adult's knowledge. Without a proper
understanding of monetary values, the child is uncertain whether the
adult is correct, even if the child knows in his heart that the adult
"knows better"; the child has no way of verifying the adult's knowledge.
Such verification will only occur later, after the child has gone
through school and learned these things for himself.

In the third case, the adult is in possession of true knowledge because
there can be no doubt. Dimes are simply worth more than nickels.

It is my feeling that we in this world most often fall into the second
category. This is not necessarily a bad place to be because it is the
domain of Faith. After our deaths, perhaps we will graduate to a higher
state of being where all things will become "known" to us.

On this earthly plane we are told that sometimes the larger pile, even
though it appears more valuable, is not really so. The smaller pile is
worth the larger amount (in this case, twice as much!).

We are told this, and we read it, and we can repeat the words. But does
it become true knowledge? How can we verify it?

Twenty-three hundred years ago the Greeks believed that a man will never
choose evil: only ignorance makes evil actions possible. I think that,
in the context of this example, they were speaking of knowledge in the
third sense: that of an adult who knows properly the value of things.

If we understood the value of a spiritual life, maybe our decisions
would bear the same character. We would not choose what is clearly less
valuable, because there is no reason to.

But to "understand" is the key word. As long as our choices do not
reflect pure knowledge-and I am not sure that they can, unless God grant
such knowledge-then we must strive ever to improve our understanding of
Faith and of Life, endeavoring with our utmost to recognize the true
value of things such that we can act accordingly.

In the example, this is represented by the child's progression toward
the understanding of the adult. Whether they have been told that dimes
are more valuable, or not, isn't the issue. The key is whether they have
truly understood the meaning of that knowledge. Without such
understanding, the information is little more than a disconnected piece
of learning, requiring much effort of willpower on the part of the child
to obey it.

But adults make no such effort of will when it comes to choices like
these. Their hearts of free of apprehension when it is a choice between
nickels and dimes. Perhaps it would be the same for us, religiously, if
we were somehow able to integrate those profound principles into our
everyday lives. I am not so sure it can happen in this life. Perhaps
that is what makes this the world of choice. In the next world, perhaps
things will be so clear that we would simply never choose differently
from what God chooses for us.

That, to me, is the challenge: to trust our Father, even though our
hearts may fear that the losses we apparently sustain are not the gains
He promises them to be.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
It is our duty to do one of two things, either to ascertain the facts,
whether by seeking instruction or by personal discovery, or, if this is
impossible, to select the best and most dependable theory which human
intelligence can supply, and use it as a raft to ride the seas of
life-that is, assuming that we cannot make our journey with greater
confidence and security by the surer means of divine revelation.[fn:1]

#+END_QUOTE

[fn:1] Plato, Protagoras
