:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       C8A5E783-3A02-4907-B613-040642614AAE
:SLUG:     the-inner-life
:END:
#+filetags: :journal:
#+title: The inner life

What is the power of the imagination? As I was watching the movie "Polar
Express", and feeling amazed by it all -- the wonderful landscapes
revealed to my eye, landscapes of fantasy and dream -- I began to feel
in my heart that these things must, in some way, be real. I make them
real, whenever I allow my spirit to soar in those imagined realms.
Watching creative films like these makes me feel as if I'm taking a
journey deep into myself.

It made me wonder, yet again, what exactly constitutes the Real. If it
is whatever has a consistent affect upon us, then ideas are no less real
than stone. The main difference is that stone exists in the material
world, thought in the human world: the kingdom of the soul.

Reflecting back, I find that as a child, I practically lived in that
world: seeing gold mines instead of creek beds, communicators instead of
watches, spaceships in place of bicycles. There were two complete
domains, one superimposed over the other: the world of awe and wonder,
and the mundane substrate that was its seed, around which the other
grew.

As the years passed, I left that first world behind, its colors, its
mysteries, its treasures and hopes. They were replaced by the religion
of science, and the great law of determinism. No more did ancient beasts
take wing when the birds flew, or jungle cougars stalk in the form of my
neighborhood cat.

What was that world? Did I too quickly allow it to be named unreal?
Because, although its treasures were accepted by no banker in the real
world, what they did buy brought my heart much happiness and joy --
which would seem a far rarer currency these days than gold.

I begin to wonder if that land was the fabled Eden, that my knowledge
slowly cast me from. In exchange for the commodity of other's words to
approve my maturity, did I give up on the Kingdom of God, which Christ
tells us lies "within you"?

I do not question the value of the practical world in keeping the body
alive, and serving as a ground for our hopes and aspirations. But what
of the sky into which those hopes yearn to fly? Perhaps that heaven lies
within: where other planets dance, and fairer stars shine with their fey
lights.

Watching films and reading books, I am recalled to that world. I know
that trains cannot fly, but I also know that it can when my imagination
gives it wings. What I see with my inward eye is often what touches my
heart the most, turning it from a mere pump into an organ of love, and
dreams, and a subtle, radiant power.

Perhaps we are meant to have two lives, one inner and one outer; to see
with two visions, and aim at two sets of goals in life. We stand astride
two kingdoms: one of the body, and one of the mind. Both have their
effect upon us. Who is to say which is more real? if we judge by the
power of each to change us, rather than by simply what submits to
measure. What is made in the outer world can be tested by the limits of
that world, but it takes a ruler of a much different kind to gauge what
is possible in the other.

I think human beings have a real inner life, which is the true
undiscovered country. As all the storybooks say, it's belief that takes
us there. And while the outer world may be our horse and carriage, the
ultimate destination lies within.
