:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       7528E03A-769C-4A33-A1E9-22B4A8447D62
:SLUG:     human-nature
:END:
#+filetags: :journal:
#+title: Human nature

Although religion tells us that none is worthy of admiration, save God,
in another way human beings are the life of the world. I offer a brief
metaphor to explain this, based on an earlier poem, to give an example
of the beauty in our beauty:

Consider a torch, how humble it is. It is a mere stick of wood, existing
only to be burnt. We even cover it over with black pitch! In respect to
beauty, it is nothing.

However, the world is over-shadowed with darkness. A lost people is
wandering in a Palace of infinite treasures, which they fail to
perceive. "Hearts have they, with which they understand not, and eyes
have they with which they see not!" This palace is filled with
masterworks of such beauty, it would shake the soul to its foundation!
But that beauty lies hidden. There is no light to see it by.

In such a place, a torch is much more than a stick of wood. Ignited by
heat, and kindled to flame, its light can reveal those beauties to the
eye. Still, it is not the torch that matters, but the light -- and
dearly so. Without it, the masterworks of Creation would lie unseen and
unappreciated. Indeed, that glory is everywhere, all around us at every
moment. We simply lack illumination.

We may be humble, pitiful, and poor, but we reveal God's attributes in
this world, much like a mirror reflecting light into the darkness. I
praise people for what I see in them. I know that what touches my eyes
is God's beauty; but mortal eyes require an earthly form to see it in.
So I honor those places, and keep them close to my heart, because they
show me glimpses of the Divine.

In like manner, a flower does little more than capture the light of the
sun: holding some of it back, reflecting the rest. From this, we see
color, and from that, tremendous beauty. Should a flower wilt because it
doesn't shine on its own? Because the light we see comes from the Sun
and not itself?

As children of the infinite, we exist as the sum of all human
possibilities, reflecting in them the attributes of heaven. For it is
remarkable that being so cruel, we can show tenderness; that being so
tender, we remain cruel; that being nothing in a scheme of galaxies and
angels, yet we manifest the Divine. #title Human nature #date 12/05/2004

There are several things that people do simply because they are people.
It is not by intention, but done unconsciously, for no other reason than
human nature. I have been pondering this while I attend as a security
guard at Bahá'í conferences. There are several traits I've noticed, but
one in particular serves well for an example:

Imagine a group of people standing outside of a room where prayers are
being said. This is a common situation, where silence is needed, and
very difficult to maintain. It tests the patience of anyone whose job it
is to keep that silence.

When people meet friends after a long time, they will get excited and
forget their surroundings, no matter how much they understand that need
for quiet. Forgetting where they are, they will talk. A little talking
leads to more talking. If other nearby are also talking, the volume of
the group gradually rises, until things get quite loud.

So it is that even when a conscientious group of people are observing
silence outside a prayer meeting, if some of them should happen to meet
friends, the whole of them will soon become rather noisy. The group
itself is unaware of this happening, so lost are they in meeting their
friends. Even if constantly asked for silence, they are almost certain
to become loud again.

It is easy to see why this frustrates those in charge of keeping
silence. The group seems intractable, willfully disobeying the constant
requests to stop talking. It can start a cycle of escalating reprimand,
with growing resentment from the group, until the people actually take
pleasure in frustrating the coordinator's need for silence.

In a Bahá'í gathering, there is fortunately the appeal to Bahá'u'lláh,
Who removes the focus from the irate facilitator, and the group is then
willing to quiet down despite any upset. But surely there must be better
ways of managing these situations, without tempers needing to flare up
at all.

Thinking on this for a long time, I came to realize that there is no
problem here to be solved. It is simply a case of human nature: trying
to fight against it is what causes the trouble. So what can one do?

As a security person in charge of keeping people silent, I've found that
people basically have two drives: their nature and their will. Their
nature is the default response to any situation -- such as talking when
friends walk by -- and their will is the option to choose differently.
Nature and will are typically at odds. Otherwise, we would always
respond solely according to our whim. The battle between nature and will
is something that requires much energy and patience.[fn:1]

The first step in dealing with people is to know that we all face this
struggle. No one is free from it. It happens every time we're faced with
a choice: will we follow our inclination, or do what we know is right?

Since everyone is engaged in this contest, they should be respected for
it. Always know that people are waging this inner war, and that they
spend tremendous energy on it. How does this help with managing people?
Rather than fighting their nature, you can enlist the support of their
will, and they will fight on your behalf.

In the case of needing silence, I find that in most cases a person does
not need to be told to be quiet -- they already know this -- but simply
made aware that they are making noise. Once they become aware of what
their nature is doing, they seek to overcome it. If instead one tries to
fight their nature, it only disrespects the individual, and provokes
other responses from their nature, such as fighting back.

Thus an adult can often be corrected in their behavior simply by looking
at them long enough. If they see you seeing them, they will look at
themselves and identify the problem. If your eyes show that you respect
and encourage their ability to resolve the matter, they will be only too
happy to do so.

In all cases, avoid conflict between your will and their nature. This
runs the danger of sub-ordinating their will, and then there is no help
from them at all. They may become truculent, pugilant, even downright
nasty. At that point, some kind of force is usually needed, or the
intervention of a third party whose words might can summon the person's
will to the fore again.

Unfortunately, this whole mechanism is very subtle and hard to see. If a
facilitator gets angry at an attendee, he is likely to provoke their
worst side, and then feel entirely justified in his anger. He never sees
that there is a better way of working with the person who now feels like
an enemy.

Respecting the battle people fight within means recognizing that at
heart, they want to do the right thing. They want what you want -- if
your request is fair. If one can only tap into this willingness, and
empower it, the person is often willing to do whatever is asked as if it
were their own desire.

I have tried this approach with thousands of people, of all ages,
friends and strangers, the kind and the irritable. It works best with
children -- strange as that may seem -- who are naturally eager to
please /if you believe in their willingness to do so/.

The greatest mistake is to assume that people want to disobey. It may be
true that it is /natural/ for people to disobey, but wrong to assume
they /wish/ to. Their will is often quite opposite to their nature. At
heart, I think people want to be kind, sharing, and helpful, even if
their nature seeks otherwise.

If no one believes in the goodness of a person's will, they can
eventually give up on the battle within, and relax entirely into the
habits of their nature. Educating people is not only about teaching them
what is right, but believing in their willingness to make that choice --
no matter how many times their nature betrays them. After all, if our
nature were already perfect, we would not need education.

In essence, this means treating people as if you expect them to want to
help you. If your request is fair, my experience is that this is almost
always the case. Even if people's nature prompts them to rebel, summon
again the assistance of their will by believing in it. It is amazing
what people will do if you show a little faith in them.

The last part to managing people is not to make things hard on their
nature. Don't set them up for failure. For example, choosing a
conference venue where it is easy for people to congregate outside a
prayer room; because talking is exactly what they're going to do, no
matter how many times you ask them not to. By helping people to help
themselves, it can be quite easy to handle very large groups of people,
and even have them enjoy you doing so.

[fn:1] Where that energy comes from depends on whether one is motivated
       by love of another, or hatred for the self's present condition.
