:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       4645D114-7FC1-4CC2-8495-8E4421C1B2C3
:SLUG:     from-sight-to-sound
:END:
---
title: From sight to sound
tags: journal
---

After all these entries on seeing and perception, something different:
My first ever attempt at recording a song! with the inestimable help of
my friend Chris Campbell of Subimage -- a wizard at the sound machine.
We recorded [[file:mp3/haftvadi.mp3][this]] in his house tonight
(download is an MP3). It's a Persian chant of my favorite mystical text:
The Seven Valleys, by Bahá'u'lláh. The style is a mixture of Eastern
(melodic) and Western (harmonic) modes. Below is an English translation
of what is chanted.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
The stages that mark the wayfarer's journey from the abode of dust to
the heavenly homeland are said to be seven. Some have called these Seven
Valleys, and others, Seven Cities. And they say that until the wayfarer
taketh leave of self, and traverseth these stages, he shall never reach
to the ocean of nearness and union, nor drink of the peerless wine. The
first is the Valley of Search The steed of this Valley is patience;
without patience the wayfarer on this journey will reach nowhere and
attain no goal. Nor should he ever be downhearted; if he strive for a
hundred thousand years and yet fail to behold the beauty of the Friend,
he should not falter. For those who seek the Ka`bih of "for Us" rejoice
in the tidings: "In Our ways will We guide them." In their search, they
have stoutly girded up the loins of service, and seek at every moment to
journey from the plane of heedlessness into the realm of being. No bond
shall hold them back, and no counsel shall deter them.

It is incumbent on these servants that they cleanse the heart -- which
is the wellspring of divine treasures -- from every marking, and that
they turn away from imitation, which is following the traces of their
forefathers and sires, and shut the door of friendliness and enmity upon
all the people of the earth.

In this journey the seeker reacheth a stage wherein he seeth all created
things wandering distracted in search of the Friend. How many a Jacob
will he see, hunting after his Joseph; he will behold many a lover,
hasting to seek the Beloved, he will witness a world of desiring ones
searching after the One Desired. At every moment he findeth a weighty
matter, in every hour he becometh aware of a mystery; for he hath taken
his heart away from both worlds, and set out for the Ka`bih of the
Beloved. At every step, aid from the Invisible Realm will attend him and
the heat of his search will grow.

One must judge of search by the standard of the Majnún of Love. It is
related that one day they came upon Majnún sifting the dust, and his
tears flowing down. They said, "What doest thou?" He said, "I seek for
Laylí." They cried, "Alas for thee! Laylí is of pure spirit, and thou
seekest her in the dust!" He said, "I seek her everywhere; haply
somewhere I shall find her."

Yea, although to the wise it be shameful to seek the Lord of Lords in
the dust, yet this betokeneth intense ardor in searching. "Whoso seeketh
out a thing with zeal shall find it."

#+END_QUOTE
