:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       EF1DD202-AF89-491E-9837-3047DDB28B6D
:SLUG:     proving-infallibility
:END:
---
title: Proving infallibility
tags: essays
---

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Someone asked of Bahá'u'lláh: /But as I have gone over and over the
issue of His infallibility in my mind, I cannot see any way to derive a
belief in it that is not circular./

#+END_QUOTE

If you examine only His statement of infallibility, it /is/ circular.
It's no more proof than if I said so.

He states "His own person" as the reason for true belief. During the
latter 1800s, this meant visiting Bahá'u'lláh Himself, and hearing His
voice. This was the basis of belief for many early Bahá'ís, who could
neither read nor write. In "Gleanings" Bahá'u'lláh writes:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
... His (God's) Manifestation can adduce no greater proof of the truth
of His Mission than the proof of His own Person.[fn:1]

#+END_QUOTE

After His passing, there remain two elements of "His own person": the
record of His deeds, and His writings. I myself am sceptical of
historical record, so I turn to the depth of His writings for ample
testimony that He is no plain author. There is too much consistency over
a long period, no backtracking, no revising of theories that became
outmoded as the years passed. But these are just what impressed me.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Question: /Do you believe Bahá'u'lláh was literally omniscient?/

#+END_QUOTE

He describes Himself in these terms:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
... this Servant regardeth Himself as utterly lost and as nothing, even
beside one of the beloved of God, how much less in the presence of His
holy ones.

#+END_QUOTE

That is what He thought of Himself, as Mirzá Husayn-`Alí. But even as a
book speaks the mind of its author -- more than just ink and paper -- so
the Will of God was revealed by Bahá'u'lláh. In Him, and His words and
actions, divine purpose was made incarnate. To emphasize this station,
He wrote the following:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
The essence of belief in Divine unity consisteth in regarding Him Who is
the Manifestation of God and Him Who is the invisible, the inaccessible,
the unknowable Essence as one and the same. By this is meant that
whatever pertaineth to the former, all His acts and doings, whatever He
ordaineth or forbiddeth, should be considered, in all their aspects, and
under all circumstances, and without any reservation, as identical with
the Will of God Himself. This is the loftiest station to which a true
believer in the unity of God can ever hope to attain. Blessed is the man
that reacheth this station, and is of them that are steadfast in their
belief.[fn:2]

#+END_QUOTE

You might say it is a question of being. To say Bahá'u'lláh is equal
with God can mean several things, some of them true, some of them false.
Consider when I pick up the telephone. It's my brother calling. Now a
young child asks, "Is that your brother?" I say, "Yes". But what if he
were asking about the plastic and machinery itself?

Bahá'u'lláh disregarded His own flesh, and proclaimed it dust. He said
the same is true of all men. What is real about us is our spirit, the
virtues we embody, and our faith. Well, when they bury me, it's not me
they're putting in the box. So which am I? The man, or what animates the
man? Bahá'u'lláh was a man just like you and I. But what animated Him
was of a different order altogether.

[fn:1] Bahá'u'lláh, Gleanings, p. 49

[fn:2] ibid, p. 167
