:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       108A48B2-1B93-48DC-99DC-9CDE15D5C23C
:SLUG:     mountain-pass
:END:
---
title: Mountain Pass
tags: stories
---

It was a strange day when the man rode in. He wore leather boots of a
make we hadn't seen before. His hat too: there was something indefinite
about the hat. Altogether the impression he made was unworldly; perhaps
it was a man from another time who dismounted then before us.

Easy, confident steps disturbed the gravel as he walked. He was nearing
us. We stood abreast on the saloon porch, eyeing him, but he continued
to advance. Could he not feel the weight of our stare?

At the middle of the road he turned and headed for the Inn. He never
looked back, or even seemed conscious of our presence. Any one of us
could have struck him from that distance, but we dared not. We were too
intrigued.

His bravado, however, was not what impressed us. He might be brave, but
so is a man who puts his own gun to his head. What captured us was the
strangeness of it all, and his firm, even tread. That was the oddest
thing of all.

I turned back to the saloon. On the face of my compadres I saw the same
puzzled look: not, "Who is this stranger with his queer intentions?"
but, "Why?" Strangeness in itself is the charm of the desert; it is the
motive that harbors the mystery.

The people in the saloon began asking questions immediately:

"Where was he from?"

"What did he want here?"

But to all the questions I remained silent. Intrigue had overcome me.
Something about the man was familiar, something dark in the black of a
moonless night. Where were the words I needed?

I stood and nodded to my compadres. I decided to retreat to the peace of
the mountains, to gather my thoughts. Perhaps the coyote would lend me
his solitude, or the twilight her clarity, or the silence its
penetrating depth.

I loaded my burro and kicked him on the sides gently. He complained, but
submitted.

We entered a grass field leading to the mountains. The sun was strong,
but low in the sky. It struck the tall grasses so that the tops were
bright but the stalks were cloaked in shadow. The burro was nervous, but
not stubborn.

We soon came to a clearing of shorter grass. A small creek from the
mountains flowed by and the burro stopped to drink. This time I let him
stop.

I dismounted and squatted by the creek. The heat of the sun made me
conscious of my skin as if it were a thing I could cast off -- an
accessory, later to be shed in the way of a snake.

My attention turned to the sun. Once there had been a kinship between
him and my people. It was he who had turned the skins brown and scorched
the earth, making it a hard place to live. His rays had chastened us
like the blows of a master's whip. It was our heritage. It had fed our
souls when times were lean. It had made us a proud and noble people.

The white man does not understand this bond. He hides in buildings so
that his skin is always white, even here in Mexico. They are a strange
people. Since their arrival, life has become too easy; when the pain of
living returns we run too quickly to alcohol and diversion.

I felt a lonely pain run through my body, stealing away life as it
penetrated the bone. With effort I pushed myself up from the ground. The
burro was grazing lazily.

I concentrated, and willed Indian blood into my muscles -- blood that
feeds on hardship and grows stronger by it. Slowly life returned. I
mounted the burro and led him back into the tall grass.

Now the sun was changing color. As it neared the horizon, I felt the
unusual clarity of twilight settling into the air. The burro pricked his
ears at the sound of a rabbit. Both our senses intensified.

Ahead the mountains were tall, only a few minutes away. It was then I
felt a presence emanating from the pass ahead. I recognized the same
feeling from before. Again an odd familiarity came over me.

The beating of my heart slowed. I heard nothing, but was acutely aware
of a man waiting for me in the pass. It seemed something ancient in me
was awakening, replacing my senses with foreign accents of power. My
head throbbed and the eyes in my Toltec skull darkened. Something remote
from my modern awareness was taking possession of me. I left the burro
without tying him and walked upward toward the pass.

With each footstep my transformation progressed. Soon I was older than
the pass, older than the stones, standing nearby a lake that had once
stood there before. I looked across the broad plain in front of me and
saw the stranger again from town. He was painted red and black, as I
was, covered only by a loin cloth. He nodded to me as I drew nearer.

Behind me a flock of geese lifted up into the sky. The burro was nowhere
to be seen. Perhaps the lake had swallowed him up or the mountains had
buried him when they had sunk into the ground.

As I approached the man it became clear to me that he was also Toltec.
Perhaps we had descended from the same tribe, but it was too far away to
be sure. He waited patiently for me to come closer.

Between the footsteps, a strange feeling began entering my body at the
navel. It filled me with a heavy sweetness and cooled the burning that
had been there before. It also cleared away the fog in my mind that had
obscured my vision until then.

At that moment I realized whom I was facing. The realization broke
through me in a sudden fever, burning away the lake, the plains and the
stranger. It was long moments, under the full moon illuminating the
pass, before I could recall his face without trembling.

The man whose face I saw was my own.
