:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       B33D9D07-C14C-4307-ABE0-F7FCFBD3CE59
:SLUG:     the-believers-are-like-an-ocean
:END:
#+filetags: :essays:
#+title: The believers are like an ocean

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
The aim of the appearance of the Blessed Perfection -- may my life be a
sacrifice for His beloved ones! -- was the unity and agreement of all
the people of the world. Therefore, my utmost desire, firstly, is the
accord and union and love of the believers and after that of all the
people of the world. Now, if unity and agreement is not established
among the believers, I will become heartbroken and the afflictions will
leave a greater imprint upon me. But if the fragrance of love and unity
among the believers is wafted to my nostrils, every trial will become a
mercy, every unhappiness a joy, every difficulty an expansion, every
misery a treasure an every hardship a felicity.[fn:1]

#+END_QUOTE

After thinking about the meaning of "ego", an image came to mind of a
vessel filled with water, afloat on a gigantic ocean. The purpose of the
vessel is to keep the water contained within it separate from the rest
of the ocean -- even though they are of the same substance. No matter
how long the vessel might drift upon the water, it will always remain
separated from the rest.

Human society today has bottled up the spirits of men and women, just as
though the waters of the ocean had been separated into individual
containers. Imagine what it would be like if the whole Pacific were
divided into one gallon and one pint jars; not the whole ocean in one
huge tank, but divided up into millions of tiny vessels, each separating
one part of the water from the rest.

Every attribute we know the ocean to have would disappear. Without the
union of the water, there would be no surging waves and no currents. The
fish could not swim, and reefs would be impossible. It would become a
dead place; or at least, if the fish still lived, it would hardly be
called an enviable existence. The waters they were used to roaming in
freely would become tiny, cramped spaces, where each could only hear his
neighbor moving -- but never see him.

The Pacific would become utterly still. Looking out, we would see
endless rows and columns of vessels -- perhaps of many shapes and colors
-- but without motion. The sea would be stilled, because the currents
which once flowed through it would have lost their course-ways.

I think such a sight seems horrific. The most wonderful attribute of the
Pacific, or of any ocean, is its amazing fluidity: the way that the
waters ceaselessly press upon and caress the shores. It gives me great
peace to watch the waters move, knowing that beneath the waves a whole
other world takes place.

Yet despite the horror, isn't this what our world has become? We seclude
the most sensitive part of ourselves within a boundary that might be
called "ego". This prevents the ocean of human life from surging in the
vast waves of progress that we all long for.

If one's spiritual nature could be called the fluid and dynamic aspect
of his person -- that essential "being" which survives any sort of
mental or physical change -- then by releasing ourselves from the prison
of self we would allow our communal essences to commingle and blend.

In the ocean there is no concept of a fixed amount of water. A gallon
poured in is immediately irretrievable. But a gallon jug thrown in can
be pulled out with that same gallon intact, down to the last molecule.

Perhaps we seclude ourselves in order to preserve what we perceive to be
our individuality. Yet this seclusion only prevents the waters from
joining, and precludes the appearance of those very aspects which make
the ocean livable. Imagine what it would be like if the souls of all men
became blended in such a way that we were not just united, but even as
one soul: just as one does not point to a certain part of the ocean as
say, "see, that part of the ocean is separate from the rest," rather
every part of the ocean is considered "the ocean". When ships drown at
sea we do not blame a particular part of the sea -- the sea as a whole
is held responsible. The waters of the ocean are viewed as a single body
of water, and likewise the souls of men would be regarded as one soul.

What the surging of the human sea would look like, I have no idea. The
days of global unity are not yet here -- although it promises to be
glorious.

Once when I was watching a film on the desert, they showed a water tower
standing in the middle of an wide open plain. Around the tower were
thousands of mirrors, each tracking the light of the sun in order to aim
it at the tower. Above the tower was a cistern, filled with water, which
would then boil and produce electricity by the pressure of the steam.
Thus, by employing the simple principles of unity and reflection it was
possible to produce energy using nothing more than mirrors, water and
sunlight.

It would seem that we are like those mirrors and at the center stands
the goal we are all looking toward: lasting peace. This peace is held up
by the latticework of a sound administration, awaiting each of our
individual rays to heat it up and bring out the energy that is latent
within it.

Above, the sun shines down its rays bountifully and without
discrimination. But the rays alone are not enough to activate the
cistern. The task involved -- and indeed this is the only real problem
to be solved -- is how to get the mirrors to align unitedly toward the
tower.

When we, as a race of spiritual beings, are turned firstly toward the
Sun, and secondly toward the tower; that is, when our reflective nature
is aimed primarily at the Sun, and our orientation is such that we
reflect the light of that Sun on our appointed task; then an energy will
be produced such as we have never seen before -- though it was always
present -- since we had never realized it until that moment.

It would seem that when the barriers of self that separate us from one
another and Our Beloved are finally dropped, and when the divided waters
of the Ocean are finally merged into a single sea, I think humanity will
witness the very thing which all the Prophets of God have professed as
Their ultimate goal and purpose. It would be a society in which the
waters need never be separated again -- not separate from one other, nor
from God, neither from happiness nor tranquility. In such a world we
would never feel alone again. Instead of seeking to preserve our
individuality to the exclusion of such a reality, we would work towards
bettering the condition of the entire sea itself.

Such a state of being could only be described as the Kingdom of God on
earth. Now, while I have no certainty that this is the way such a thing
will come about, it seems to me that the Writings stress very greatly
the importance of harmony and unity. Religion, a Latin-derived word
stemming from "re-ligare" -- which means literally "to bind or fasten
together again" -- has been called by Bahá'u'lláh, "the highest means
for the maintenance of order in the world and the security of its
peoples." The Guardian declared, "... the purpose of religion to be the
promotion of amity and concord." He said of `Abdu'l-Bahá that "... The
Master often denied Himself any station just to maintain the unity of
the friends for that was His primary object." We have often heard the
quote that, "If religion proves to be the source of hatred, enmity and
contention, if it becomes the cause of warfare and strife and influences
men to kill each other, its absence is preferable." Bahá'u'lláh likewise
commands us: "Ye have been forbidden in the Book of God to engage in
contention and conflict, to strike another, or to commit similar acts
whereby hearts and souls may be saddened..." He tells of the Báb that
"... A fine of nineteen mithqals of gold had formerly been prescribed by
Him Who is the Lord of all mankind for anyone who was the cause of
sadness to another..." And in the ninth Ishráq of the Tablet of Ishráqát
(Splendors), Bahá'u'lláh reveals that "The purpose of religion as
revealed from the heaven of God's holy Will is to establish unity and
concord amongst the peoples of the world; make it not the cause of
dissension and strife. The religion of God and His divine law are the
most potent instruments and the surest of all means for the dawning of
the light of unity amongst men."

With this in mind, perhaps the reason why religion has been given that
very name (i.e., to bind together again), is because, for whatever
reason, we have somehow become separated and through the agency of God's
Will we will be enabled someday to join together again in spiritual
harmony. If the laws of nature were allowed to prevail, I am sure we
would end up bathing in each other's blood. However, it is powerfully
cogent to me to think that since we are beings of such tremendous
capacity, then as a race there would also exist some as yet unrealized
potential -- a treasure which the key of God's Word has been destined to
unlock in the hearts of men. Perhaps the existentialists believe that
life has no purpose beyond the evident happenings that we see, but isn't
it more appealing to the mind to think that we are all moving toward
something definite and spectacular? Perhaps toward a pattern of
existence which defies all current models of human interrelationship.
The design of the pattern has been laid down by the Manifestations of
God; the raw material has been handed us by Providence; and the yearning
to build it has been fused into our very core. I think the most
fulfilling thing any one of us can do is to throw down everything we
hold dear, embrace one another, and discover a wealth stemming from
unity that far exceeds any possession we could ever own.

On this note, I would like to close with a quote that a fellow Bahá'í
shared with me which I had never seen before. It certainly seems to
indicate something wonderful awaiting us in the coming age.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
O ye friends of God! Today is the day of union and this age is the age
of harmony in the world of existence. "Verily, God loveth those who are
working in His path in groups, for they are a solid foundation."
Consider ye that he says "in groups," united and bound together,
supporting one another. "To work," mentioned in this holy verse, does
not mean, in this greatest age, to perform it with swords, spears,
shafts and arrows, but rather with sincere intentions, good designs,
useful advices, divine moralities, beautiful actions, spiritual
qualities, educating the public, guiding the souls of mankind, diffusing
spiritual fragrances, explaining divine illustrations, showing
convincing proofs and doing charitable deeds. When the holy souls,
through the angelic power, will arise to show forth these celestial
characteristics, establishing a band of harmony, each of these souls
shall be regarded as one thousand persons and the waves of this greatest
ocean shall be considered as the army of the hosts of the Supreme
Concourse.

What a great blessing it is when the torrents, streams, currents, tides,
and drops are all gathered in one place! They will form a great ocean
and the real harmony shall overcome and reign in such a manner that all
the rules, laws, distinctions and differences of the imaginations of
these souls shall disappear and vanish like little drops and shall be
submerged in the ocean of spiritual unity. By the Ancient Beauty, in
this case and condition, the blessings of the great ocean will overflow
and canals shall become as spacious as an endless ocean and each drop
shall become as a boundless sea!

O ye friends of God! Strive to attain to this high and sublime station
and show forth such a brightness in these days that its radiance may
appear from the eternal horizons. This is the real foundation of the
Cause of God; this is the essence of the divine doctrine; this is the
cause of the revelation of the heavenly Scriptures; this is the means of
the appearance of the Sun of the divine world; this is the way of the
establishment of God upon the bodily throne.[fn:2]

#+END_QUOTE

But perhaps the theme of my post isn't very clear. I apologize if it
seems to ramble. The basic idea is that unity is by far the most
important goal for our community to strive toward. Even knowledge,
though it may appeal to us all, is little more than a tool to be put to
use by our spiritual natures. And like any tool, such as knives or the
like, its usefulness is only worthwhile so long as no one gets harmed in
the process. Otherwise, abandoning it entirely is far better than some
kind of Pyrrhic victory, when the road to our dreams has been paved by
the broken hearts of our loved ones and friends.

[fn:1] `Abdu'l-Bahá, Bahá'í World Faith, p. 403

[fn:2] ibid, p. 401
