:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       067E3100-786B-431D-9967-7F7A5C4CF64D
:SLUG:     detachment
:END:
---
title: Detachment
tags: journal
---

Detachment can be a tricky concept. It underlies most spiritual
striving, but can have many forms. In the Bahá'í Writings, the original
word is "inqitaa=", derived from "qat=": to cut. One could easily
translate this as "severing one's self from the world", as in the
statement, "Be thou severed from this world...".

There is, however, an irony to using this metaphor: Is our ultimate goal
unity, or separation?

Perhaps "cutting off" refers to something else, a realization of which
would draw us closer, not push us away, from the world in which we live.
Otherwise, we're forced into a dualistic metaphysics containing both
"God" and "not God" -- with our soul always caught between the two. Yet
how can what is "not God" possess sufficient reality to command our
attention, compared to "God"? It doesn't make any sense.

Holding unity as my object, then, I re-evaluate my concept of
detachment: one in which "detaching" would bring me closer to my goal,
not farther away...

For instance, an example from ordinary life: If I'm in a relationship
with someone, and they do something that bothers me, the odds are good
they didn't do it to upset me (what kind of friend would that be?). But
as long as I let my take on things upset me, it will isolate my heart
from my friend. To be closer, I must give up the expectation of mine
that bothered me. That is, by severing a part of "me", I can be closer
to her.

If detachment means severing our soul from what blinds us, rather than
insulating ourselves from God's creation, then it echoes something
Bahá'u'lláh wrote:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Know ye that by "the world" is meant your unawareness of Him Who is your
Maker, and your absorption in aught else but Him. The "life to come," on
the other hand, signifieth the things that give you a safe approach to
God, the All-Glorious, the Incomparable. Whatsoever deterreth you, in
this Day, from loving God is nothing but the world. Flee it, that ye may
be numbered with the blest. Should a man wish to adorn himself with the
ornaments of the earth, to wear its apparels, or partake of the benefits
it can bestow, no harm can befall him, if he alloweth nothing whatever
to intervene between him and God, for God hath ordained every good
thing, whether created in the heavens or in the earth, for such of His
servants as truly believe in Him. Eat ye, O people, of the good things
which God hath allowed you, and deprive not yourselves from His wondrous
bounties. Render thanks and praise unto Him, and be of them that are
truly thankful.[fn:1]

#+END_QUOTE

I read this quote as implying that what we call "the world" -- the
reality outside our window -- can be either heaven or hell: If it draw
us away, it is "the world"; if it lead us closer, it is "the life to
come". Detachment concerns whatever prevents us from appreciating this
latter role -- which might mean detaching from be our very idea of
detachment!!

And so it dawns on me that the fine and beautiful things I see in life
do not take me from God, rather, they are my experience of His
attributes in the medium of this life. My idea of detachment had created
a schism in my heart: a conflict between loving the beauty I saw, and
later thinking it was "not God". But beauty can only derive its nature
from the selfsame Beauty my soul has always desired: there need be no
conflict. It is this conflict itself I must detach from, for more than
anything else, it numbs my soul to the glories around me.

[fn:1] Hadith, or tradition of Islám
