:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       91F4DA8F-478B-4A96-B6FA-D78299278B82
:SLUG:     passage-from-watts
:END:
#+filetags: :journal:
#+title: Passage from Watts

Continuing on with my reading of Alan Watts, I came across these
paragraphs, which express so well much of what I've been meaning to say:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
In the strictest sense, we cannot actually think about life and reality
at all, because this would have to include thinking about thinking,
thinking about thinking about thinking, and so /ad infinitum/. One can
only attempt a rational, descriptive philosophy of the universe on the
assumption that one is totally separate from it. But if you and your
thoughts are part of this universe, you cannot stand outside them to
describe them. This is why all philosophical and theological systems
must ultimately fall apart. To "know" reality you cannot stand outside
it and define it; you must enter int it, be it, and feel it.

Speculative philosophy, as we know it in the West, is almost entirely a
symptom of the divided mind, of man trying to stand outside himself and
his experience in order to verbalize and define it. It is a vicious
circle, like everything else which the divided mind attempts.

On the other hand, the realization that the mind is actually undivided
must have a corresponding and equally far-reaching influence on thought
and action. As the philosopher tries to stand outside himself and his
thought, so, as we have seen, the ordinary man tries to stand outside
himself and his emotions and sensations, his feelings and desires. The
result is a fantastic confusion and misdirection of conduct which
discovery of the mind's unity must bring to an end.

So long as the mind is split, life is perpetual conflict, tension,
frustration, and disillusion. Suffering is piled on suffering, fear on
fear, and boredom on boredom. The more the fly struggles to get out of
the honey, the faster he is stuck. Under the pressure of so much strain
and futility, it is no wonder at all that men seek release in violence
and sensationalism, and in the reckless exploitation of their bodies,
their appetites, their material world, and their fellow men. What this
must add to the necessary and unavoidable pains of existence is
incalculable.

But the undivided mind is free from this tension of trying always to
stand outside oneself and to be anywhere than here and now. Each moment
is lived completely, and there is thus a sense of fulfillment and
completeness. The divided mind comes to the dinner table and pecks at
one dish after another, rushing on without digesting anything to find
out better than the last. It finds nothing good, because there is
nothing which it really tastes.

When, on the other hand, you realize that you live in, indeed /are/ this
moment now, and no other, that apart from this there is no past and no
future, you must relax and taste to the full, whether it be pleasure or
pain. At once it becomes obvious why this universe exists, why conscious
beings have been produced, why sensitive organs, why space, time, and
change. The whole problem of justifying nature, of trying to make life
mean something in terms of its future, disappears utterly. Obviously, it
all exists for this moment. It is a dance, and when you are dancing you
are not intent on getting somewhere. You go round and round, but not
under the illusion that you are pursuing something, or fleeing from the
jaws of hell....

The meaning and purpose of dancing is the dance. Like music, also, it is
fulfilled in each moment of the course. You do not play a sonata /in
order/ to reach the final chord, and if the meaning of things were
simply in ends, composers would write nothing but finales....

When each moment becomes an expectation life is deprived of fulfillment,
and death is dreaded for it seems that here expectation must come to an
end. While there is life there is hope -- and if one lives on hope,
death is indeed the end. But to the undivided mind, death is another
moment, complete like every moment, and cannot yield its secret unless
lived to the full --

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
/And I laid me down with a will./

#+END_QUOTE

Death is the epitome of the truth that in each moment we are thrust into
the unknown. Here all clinging to security is compelled to cease, and
wherever the past is dropped away and safety abandoned, life is renewed.
Death is the unknown in which all of us lived before birth.

Nothing is more creative than death, since it is the whole secret of
life. It means that the past must be abandoned, that the unknown cannot
be avoided, that "I" cannot continue, and that nothing can be ultimately
fixed. When a man knows this, he lives for the first time in his life.
By holding his breath, he loses it. By letting it go he finds it.

#+END_QUOTE
