:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       6E6BE90A-B87E-43C5-86FB-A686B8170976
:SLUG:     religion-and-ethics
:END:
---
title: Religion and Ethics
tags: essays
---

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
... it is the relationship of the individual soul to God and the
fulfilment of its spiritual destiny that is the ultimate aim of the laws
of religion.[fn:1]

#+END_QUOTE

At some point recently it dawned on my attention that most of the world
considers religion as primarily a system of ethics. That is, religion is
about what a person should or shouldn't do in order to become a better
person.

This would seem to be the ostensible focus of the Christian church,
whose doctrine is sometimes entirely concerned with the salvation of the
individual believer. Although "doing good" may mean having faith rather
than performing good deeds, all the same it regards the actions of the
individual, and how those actions transform one's life.

But it is my opinion that religion is very different from ethics, and in
fact is not at all an ethical system.

In ethics, according to my understanding, virtue is a state of being in
which the good has taken root in a person's life; the good is attracted
by certain behaviors, called virtuous, and by aligning ourselves with
those behaviors, we reach the culmination of our human nature.

Since these behaviors are the primary focus of ethics, good behavior
will constitute success, and bad behavior, failure. So that if we are
not acting according to our ethical guidelines, we are in a state of
failure to some degree; and likewise, anyone who does act in such a way,
has succeeded.

Now, religion definitely prescribes a set of laws for the believers to
follow, and in this I can see a correlation to ethics. But most
religionists understand that it's not just about what you do. In fact,
parts of the Christian church have taken this to an extreme, whereby
they claim that faith alone offers salvation.

In the Bahá'í Writings, it is also stated that behavior alone is not
sufficient. Bahá'u'lláh begins His book of laws by stating:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Whoso achieveth this duty [of recognizing the Manifestation] hath
attained unto all good; and whoso is deprived thereof hath gone astray,
though he be the author of every righteous deed.[fn:2]

#+END_QUOTE

Yet immediately after this sentence He commands our obedience, and
claims that recognition of Him is not acceptable without such obedience.

So there is an interplay here between our mystical relationship with
God, and what appears to be an ethical system of conduct for the
believers to follow. But herein lie also many snares, since each half of
the scenario is sometimes considered separately: am I succeeding in life
because I am nearer to God? But how can this be if my behavior is not in
line with the Teachings? Conversely, am I succeeding because I act
properly? But how can this be if my heart feels empty?

Our failure to behave with complete propriety (which is the lot of us
all, I'm afraid) can become a source of anxiety, because one half of
Bahá'u'lláh's prescription seems to indicate that our lives, and our
love for God, is unacceptable to the extent that we fail in our
behavior.

This is the ethical view: that virtue consists wholly in acting rightly.
Since this idea comes from Aristotle, it's understandable that we find
it at the core of our Western perspective. So indivorcible is it, in
fact, that we regularly fall into the trap of considering religion as
equivalent to a system of ethics.

I run into this in people's choice of prayers, or their favorite quotes.
Next time, when someone shares something from the Writings with you,
what kind do they choose? Bahá'u'lláh revealed in many voices, one of
which is the lawgiver. What voice do they commonly pick as their
favorite? The ethical "mode" would prefer the lawgiver, since it makes
religious life clear and definite. But how often do they choose the
truth-seeker, or the mystic? These are much less clear with regard to
what one should "do", and yet they are no less valid.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
At one time We spoke in the language of the lawgiver; at another in that
of the truth-seeker and the mystic, and yet Our supreme purpose and
highest wish hath always been to disclose the glory and sublimity of
this station. God, verily, is a sufficient witness![fn:3]

#+END_QUOTE

The image that came to mind to describe the difference between ethics
and religion is that of looking for treasure on a treasure map. A map
gives certain directions in order for you to find your goal. It says: at
this juncture turn left, and here, turn right; but when you're here,
/don't/ turn left, as that will lead you astray.

When we think of following the directions on a map, do we consider that
"ethical"? It's a bit different from saying "you should do this" or "you
should do that." Instead, directions take the shape of "you should do
this to find the treasure" or "you should do that if you want to reach
your goal."

Sometimes these directions are not spatial. For example, we know that we
shouldn't drink alcohol if we want to drive a car. The reason is not
that abstaining from alcohol is more virtuous, but that if we want to
drive safely, we shouldn't impair our coordination and reflexes. (Which
is not to say that drinking alcohol is ever OK, but ethically the reason
for refraining is that the effects are undesirable in the long run, and
not due to anything intrinisically terrible about alcohol itself). This
is not an ethical mandate, but a practical one, in view of achieving our
goal.

Which comes to my conclusion: I believe that religion is not about us
and our behavior. It is about the Glory of God, and how we can achieve
nearness to Him; in the same way as a treasure map, the Kitáb-i-Aqdas is
not an ethical text, but a guidebook for discovering this treasure.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
O ye peoples of the world! Know assuredly that My commandments are the
lamps of My loving providence among My servants, and the keys of My
mercy for My creatures.[fn:4]

#+END_QUOTE

Perhaps these are lamps to find our way through the night, and keys to
unlock the doors of His mystery? Each image implies movement toward
something else. Also, when we search for treasure, success is measured
not by how well we behave, but in our nearness to the objective.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
O Son of Man! Sorrow not save that thou art far from Us. Rejoice not
save that thou art drawing near and returning unto Us.[fn:5]

#+END_QUOTE

Correct behavior is necessary, then, not for its own sake -- which is
the mode of an ethical system -- but simply because it is what we must
do in order to unearth those faculties within us which will allow us to
ascend home. If that world is spirit, and we are still of the earth, how
can we return?

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
O Son of Desire! Give ear unto this: Never shall mortal eye recognize
the everlasting Beauty, nor the lifeless heart delight in aught but in
the withered bloom. For like seeketh like, and taketh pleasure in the
company of its kind.[fn:6]

#+END_QUOTE

We become spiritual, not in order to "achieve" anything, but so that we
can discern the signposts leading home. For example, all of us speak at
least one language. Did we learn our mother tongue because we saw it as
a virtuous thing to do, or simply because we needed it to function in
this world? Similarly, I believe that the development of our spiritual
capacities is much like exercising our infant wings, so that one day we
may become strong enough to fly heavenward.

In conclusion, religion is not ethics: religion is about God. The laws
of God weren't given us for their own sake, but rather as keys to unlock
the spiritual potentialities of our being, so that we might relate to
the world in which He abides. If we choose not to pursue them, who is at
a loss? If we do achieve them, who is at a gain? There is no loss and
gain; either we are advancing toward God, or we are becoming more and
more embroiled in this world. At the end, His is the beautiful life; I
think that far from being a burdensome thing ridden with guilt, and a
sense of failure, religion should be considered as a door opening up to
a world we've never seen. The mystery, and the excitement, is what lies
beyond...

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Make not your deeds as snares wherewith to entrap the object of your
aspiration, and deprive not yourselves of this Ultimate Objective for
which have ever yearned all such as have drawn nigh unto God. Say: The
very life of all deeds is My good pleasure, and all things depend upon
Mine acceptance. Read ye the Tablets that ye may know what hath been
purposed in the Books of God, the All-Glorious, the Ever-Bounteous. He
who attaineth to My love hath title to a throne of gold, to sit thereon
in honour over all the world; he who is deprived thereof, though he sit
upon the dust, that dust would seek refuge with God, the Lord of all
Religions.[fn:7]

#+END_QUOTE

[fn:1] Universal House of Justice, Introduction to the Kitáb-i-Aqdas,
       pp. 2-3

[fn:2] Bahá'u'lláh, Kitáb-i-Aqdas, 1st paragraph

[fn:3] Bahá'u'lláh, Epistle to the Son of the Wolf, p. 15

[fn:4] Bahá'u'lláh, Kitáb-i-Aqdas, 3rd paragraph

[fn:5] Bahá'u'lláh, Hidden Words, Arabic 35

[fn:6] Bahá'u'lláh, Hidden Words, Persian 10

[fn:7] Bahá'u'lláh, Kitáb-i-Aqdas, Paragraph 36
