:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       56751C72-C01B-41E3-8501-F21422587C36
:SLUG:     seeking-the-ideal-beauty
:END:
---
title: Seeking the ideal beauty
tags: essays
---

One of the underlying thoughts in religion, and more ancient philosophic
literature, is the idea of the human being's kinship with the divine:
that there is some part of us, some inner core, which is not of this
world, but rather comes from the world beyond. As such, it relates to
that world, instead of to this one. It is like a stranger in a strange
land here on Earth, and in reality longs to return to its spiritual
home.

But, from the instant we are born into this life, the demands of the
body dominate our attention. We immediately feel many needs, such as
hunger, the need to breathe, sleep, etc. It is due to the forcefulness
of these impressions that we begin to consider them "real", and to pay
attention to them.

After very little time, other human beings around us begin to reinforce
our sense of the reality of the physical world. Even until the time we
start life on our own, society and friends continue to encourage us to
pay heed to the demands of our physical nature -- in some cases, to the
extent that we deny our spiritual part completely.

Unless man is given some way to foster the consciousness of his
spiritual nature, and hence to educate it and develop its capacities, he
is primarily living a "physical life". That is, his relationship to the
world around him is based on physical terms, taking no account for the
rules which govern the life of his spirit.

Our spiritual nature, however, is our true reality, and it is this which
defines who we actually are. The physical nature is simply a vehicle,
even though it may make very real demands on our time.

Educating our spiritual nature into awareness is one of the goals of
religion. This is a complex, and at times bewildering, process, and yet
nothing else quite like religion so directly focuses on the needs of our
spirit. For this reason, I think Plato's ideas of the soul and its quest
for beauty have a close relationship with what we find in the writings
of the Faith on the subject of the nature of the soul.

Man has been created with a twofold nature. In one respect, he is a
physical entity having attributes in common with the animal kingdom. But
the real essence of his being is that he was created with an eternal
nature, an immortal soul. It is in this respect that he bears a certain
kinship with the divine, just as the Bible states that we were "created
in the image of God".

It is due to this kinship that man relates primarily to the kingdom of
the ideal. For even though he may seem at first to be mainly a physical
being in this life, if we look closely I believe we can find evidences
of his divine origin in every aspect of our lives.

Human beings are born into this world with completely no knowledge. Our
spirits, since they employ a physical body as their means for existing
in this life, are entirely ignorant of their nature. Due to the physical
demands of our bodies, we perceive this life to be "real", since it
forces itself upon our awareness so violently that we can perceive
little else. Society and our peers also reinforce this perception, and
may at times council us to believe that this is indeed all there is. But
the spirit, despite whatever may happen to us, still bears its
relationship to the immortal realm. It will always know where it came
from, and longs to return there.

This relationship is one of coincidence only, however. Since the soul is
essentially divine, it feels kinship with the divine; but this does not
mean it knows where to find divinity, or how to establish a relationship
with it.

The soul can only relate to the world according to its knowledge.
Outside of this knowledge, it has no awareness of any kind. And so its
longing for beauty, or love, will take shape corresponding to its
understanding of these divine realities.

In fact, any understanding we may have of beauty, in any form, derives
from our essential relationship with it: from our common nature. So that
if a person is attracted to the appearance of someone, or a painting, or
a scene of nature, what they are attracted to about it is the reflection
of any divine attributes within it. Outside of this, color and shape are
merely emanations of light. Yet for those with the capacity to
appreciate beauty, such physical phenomena will invariably come alive
with glorious representations of the spiritual kingdom.

Our first experience of the world is physical, and until we learn
otherwise, we continue to relate to it physically. In this sense, we are
drawn toward anything that is good, beautiful, fulfilling, according to
our ability to perceive it. And since our vision at first depends mostly
on our physical eyes, we pursue beauty where we can best find it
physically.

The essential idea, however, is that even physical beauty is not purely
physical. In fact, in the absence of a human mind to perceive it, I
believe there would be no such thing as physical beauty. It would become
merely light waves, or a combination of intensities of light. But hidden
within this there is a semblance of beauty, which the human eye is
capable of perceiving because it understands beauty intuitively, due to
its inherent relationship. It is important to note that our eyes do not
perceive beauty; it is what the soul experiences, according to what the
eyes transmit, that we call beauty.

Thus the more involved the soul is in the act of perceiving, the greater
its experience of beauty will be. If the soul looks at things with only
physical eyes, it will see beauty only in physical objects. In would be
like trying to listen to delicate music through a brick wall: only a
certain part of the sound comes through; and even what does is neither
very accurate, nor intense.

The goal is free ourselves from the obstruction -- the brick wall --
which intervenes between us and what we seek. I say "seek", even though
we may not be aware of it as seeking. Yet, consider that human beings
are always seeking experiences which animals would never desire: they
want to feel fulfillment in their lives, they want to find happiness,
they want to achieve something. We are always looking for a way to
transcend our ordinary, dull existence. "Praise be to God! man is always
turned toward the heights, and his aspiration is lofty; he always
desires to reach a greater world than the world in which he is, and to
mount to a higher sphere than that in which he is. The love of
exaltation is one of the characteristics of man." (Some Answered
Questions, p.Â 188). But animals want just the opposite. If they could
achieve a mindless routine that would keep them well-fed and safe --
with perhaps an opportunity here and there for exercise, or whatever
social urges they might feel the need to pursue -- they would call that
perfection. I can't think of a cat or dog who has ever become
discontented with a good owner, no matter how invariable his life may
have become.

Human beings, though, are always looking to satisfy some indefinite
desire within themselves. It seems almost like a sense of homelessness:
that we are not of this world, and our souls know this. And so we seek
to find that place which will make us feel as though we completely
belong there. And it is just because this "place", the spiritual world,
reflects its attributes on this plane of existence, that we pursue
material objects for fulfillment. Otherwise, if the physical world were
bereft entirely of its capacity to reflect spiritual attributes, I think
we would feel for it about as much as we feel for a pound of sand.

Imagine, in fact, that our need to eat, drink, sleep, etc., had
magically vanished. Yet imagine also that the entire world contained
nothing but sand. Nothing else but sand. Our mating urges would have
also vanished, and so picture the world as being inhabited by no one but
people of the same sex. So here we sit on our mound of sand -- which
hasn't even the decency to form itself into dunes, since there is no
wind, either -- with absolutely no need to do anything. We just sit
around, nothing forcing us to move, and nowhere to go.

I think most people would consider this hell. But this is something
similar to what the world would be like if we stripped it of every
reflection of the divine. Perhaps some mystic might yet find a paradise
in such a world, but for anyone who depended on their physical body to
perceive beauty, there would be precious little for him to look at.

So even our love for the things of this world comes from the fact that
they bear some kind of resemblance to spiritual reality. It is because
of this that we actually pursue them as if they would grant us the
happiness we seek; at times, we even arrange our entire lives around the
pursuit of some material goal. When in reality the purpose of this world
is only to sustain the health of our bodies, and the promulgation of the
species; at least, that's how it looks from the animal kingdom's point
of view.

Yet we humans go so much farther than merely satisfying our basic
physical needs, that it must make anyone wonder. Is the addition of
abstract thought -- which is the only difference that materialists grant
to the reality of man -- so profound a thing that it would explain the
irrational and chaotic endeavors of men? Our behavior is so radically
different from animals in certain respects that it would seem to me that
there must be more at the heart of the matter, which would give a
consistent picture why we behave the way we do; which, if taken into
consideration, would make us appear no longer irrational, but very
definitely following a set course toward a determined objective.

This objective, I believe, is to find a place, situation, or
circumstances, which would make us feel "complete". Just as hunger seeks
to be satisfied -- without ever explaining why it should be -- so the
spirit longs to regain its home, without seeking to justify its longing.
There are many things that we do simply because they feel good, and we
accept this as a sufficient reason for why we do them. What other goal
but true happiness is needed to understand why the soul desires to find
that homeland from which it came?

What must happen is for us to find the Way to that condition of being.
To do this requires being able to discern the signs clearly. This means
finding a way to discover the divine principles more and more directly
-- since perceiving them through the material senses always distorts
them to some degree.

In the beauty of a sunrise, for example, we see the reflection of the
divine beauty. But in order to separate away the material elements of
the picture, in order to leave nothing but pure beauty, would require
already knowing which where the physical elements, and which were the
divine. However, since possessing this knowledge is the end we have in
mind, then in our condition of ignorance we will not know which are the
divine aspects, and which are the material.

Because of this confusion, we are likely to pursue our heart's desire
sometimes in the wrong direction. We may discover beauty in the physical
forms of other human beings, and then mistake these forms for beauty
itself, and wind up organizing our lives around this one objective. But
it is not the form which should be seeking; rather, beauty itself.

It is very difficult, without already possessing a knowledge of what
beauty is in its essence, to go about finding it. It's almost a
catch-22, since, without the capacity to distinguish between what is
truly beauty and what is merely a physical form reflecting beauty, we
really can't know whether we've taken a right step or not. Sometimes the
physical object is so pleasurable that it's just about impossible to
remain objective in order to see things clearly.

In fact, it is entirely impossible. The physical world is too beguiling,
and the object which we seek too elusive, for us ever to achieve this on
our own. Left alone, we would end up worshiping whatever was most
physically attractive, simply because this is as real as beauty would
ever be for us. What other way of seeing things with our physical eyes
is there? In what way would the human soul ever receive the education it
requires in order to break into the light, unless there were some way
that a pure knowledge could be transmitted to us, in a form that we
could understand? It would be like to trying to describe the experience
of sight or color to a blind man. Without some common frame of
reference, the communication of this knowledge would be impossible.

This is exactly where the Messengers of God come in. It is because these
Individuals have a direct knowledge of the Truth -- unobstructed by the
normal hindrances of the human body -- that they are able to communicate
this knowledge to us in a form we can understand. Even still, the
knowledge is presented, but it is not a knowledge of anything we have
had any experience of, except dimly. And so at first it seems strange,
or incomprehensible; not because the prophets desire to keep anything
hidden, but because we can't relate to what's being said. It would be
like opening a Calculus text book with no prior knowledge of math: all
of the answers are there, in clear print, but we are not yet able to
understand them.

Understanding the principles of math is a slow, continual process of
building concept upon concept, one at a time. Our spiritual education is
something very similar. The Prophets communicate knowledge which our
souls may relate to, but our minds and hearts are completely unfamiliar
with. It requires time, and patience -- but it is by no means
impossible.

This knowledge communicated by the prophets is often understood by some,
but not all, of the people. And since God has sent Prophets to us since
the beginning of man's existence, we have always had the benefit of
their knowledge, even if we did not always understand what was being
taught to us.

It is in this way that the philosophers and sages are able to postulate
and make discoveries about the nature and condition of the soul. Since
even in the fairy tales that our parents tell us when we're younger --
perhaps the crudest form of ethical philosophy -- there is a faint echo
of the teachings of the early Prophets. That which had benefit was kept,
and that which was useless was discarded. Humanity knew that justice was
a required principle of government, and for this reason we still find it
with us today, despite the various forms it may take -- at times being
so crudely implemented as to seem antipodal to the divine message it
came from.

In the Writings of the Manifestations themselves, however, we find the
most direct, unmodified transmission of these spiritual teachings. These
teachings direct us toward our goal -- what has been called the
"Straight Path", or the "gate of heaven" -- and they instruct us as to
what we must do in order to better our spiritual perception, and thus
make the correct decisions which will ultimately lead to our true
happiness. It is through them that we learn how to separate between the
divine realities being expressed in nature, and the lifeless, material
elements which are used as the medium for their expression.

Plato's means of achieving this goal, a mode of life lived according to
the soul rather than the body, was to lessen the attention paid to the
body to the extent that the soul's needs must perforce break through.
But we know this to be a crude and inexact approximation of the divine
teachings. There is nothing inherently bad or evil about material
reality. At worst, it simply has no value at all. And yet it does reveal
to us, in the form of our first experience with the divine kingdom,
those attributes which are possessed by our Creator. The only real
tragedy is if we mistake the medium for the message, and direct our
lives toward the pursuit of some material object, when in reality it is
something much more ethereal about that material object which we are
attracted to.

Hence religion indicates to us that our desire for beauty in any
physical object is really the soul's desire to be reacquainted with the
divine beauty from which that object derives its qualities. It also
teaches us how to distinguish between the twofold nature of the physical
world, and to learn to appreciate the divine realities directly, without
depending on our physical senses at all.

For what would happen to us if one day our sight were lost, and our only
means of perceiving beauty had been through our eyes? Or if it were by
sound that we knew these things, and we then lost our hearing?

In fact, the day will come when we will have lost all our physical
senses, and if, by that time, we have not learned how to apprehend the
divine reality any other way, what will become of us? All of the
concrete things by which we knew God's qualities will be gone. If we
haven't learned how to use the faculties of our soul by then, we will be
just as handicapped in the next world as a blind person is here on
Earth. It would be like to a baby which saw no need to develop its power
of sight, only to discover later, and much to its chagrin, how important
that ability really was.

But even the loss of sight does not render a person's life naught. They
are still able to manage, just as I believe that all souls, no matter
how ignorant they may have been of the spiritual truths, will be able to
make a life for themselves in the next world, and develop some sort of
relationship with that world. But the degree of appreciation one
develops for beauty is in direct proportion to his ability to perceive
it. Do we want merely to exist, or to find the most desirable existence
possible? None of us would choose to have been born blind, since it is
evidently a condition of loss. Yet now we have a very similar choice,
with regard to our spiritual vision: will we choose to remain wholly
dependent on our physical eyes, and left entirely to God's mercy when we
lose those eyes, or will we attempt to discover another mode of
perception, one which is more directly related to the nature of the
soul, and hence be possessed of a faculty which we will not lose when we
shake off this mortal coil?

It is the soul inside us which constitutes who we truly are, and in
reality every aspect of our lives is determined by this truth, whether
we are able to see how this is so or not. We may not be aware that our
desire for beauty stems from our inherent relationship to the divine,
but nevertheless the soul is at the root of all of our actions, feelings
and experiences. The aim of the philosophers, and the intent of
religion, is to teach us a new means of relating to the world; one which
is more directly in touch with our true nature, and which lessens our
dependence on the physical vessel in which our souls exist, so that one
day, when this body is gone, we will have learned to swim well enough to
be able to push off from the pier unassisted. We are, in a sense, being
taught how to "use our souls" -- since true sight is something very
different from physical sight, even though physical sight may be able to
teach us some things, in a symbolic way, about the former. Perceiving
the world according to its real, essential reality, is something foreign
to our physical mode of existence. Our souls are very aware that this
crude, material substance is not what it seeks.

Hence it is the ideal of beauty, not merely it various manifestations,
that we are ultimately seeking. And it is the Prophets of God alone Who
can teach us how to achieve this ideal. It is a tricky thing, something
that we must admit to having little or no knowledge of, for the very
reason that material existence is so misleading; but with prayer,
meditation, and striving to harmonize our outward lives with what we've
been taught, we can learn someday how to break free of our crutches,
which are supporting us during this time of ignorance.

On that day, when we come face to face with the nature of beauty itself,
it will be as much grander as the perception of beauty in this world is
to a mere, verbal description of it. For is it possible that the word
"sunset" could convey all that that word implies, or be anything more to
the hearer than merely a reminder of something he already knows? So too,
how can we expect the glory of the next world to be comprehensible to
us, if we are condemned here on Earth only to fall in love with its
shadows? The essence of everything we love about life comes from that
world, and so try to imagine, in lieu of experience, what it would be
like if from a lone vibration our hearing were suddenly to develop into
a realization of the symphony from which it had issued; or if from a
glimmer of light, we were suddenly brought into an awareness of the
entire luminescence of the Sun. I think that we have seen so far only
the dimmest suggestions of what life truly is, and when we move on, the
very greatest thing that we ever knew in this life will seem to us as
commonplace as the sand on the beach, or the never-ending, lullaby
motion of the waves.
