:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       0F00E9FD-BD21-4553-912F-0CE70DFD114E
:SLUG:     change-is-natural
:END:
---
title: Change is natural
tags: essays
---

Change occurs naturally. It has always, and will always occur. The
direction of change is something we can participate in, of course. At
the same time, we cannot help BUT participate in change. There is no way
we cannot become a part of the changes in the world around us.

Thus, how we participate in change is the only variable. Clearly, the
change itself is not significant, because change will happen whether we
are alive or dead; in fact, even if there were no humanity, the world
would still change. It has been doing so for five billion years,
according to the scientists, and will continue until it changes into
something else entirely.

To my thinking, this underscores the fact that change is not
significant. In fact, change is free; change is unavoidable. Change is a
natural condition that results from the passage of time.

So for us to desire change is to desire what we already have. Some will
say, then, that we must desire a particular kind of change. But given
our limited ability to conceive the limitless interconnections between
things, how can our minds truly architect the kinds of changes we want?
Even after ten minutes, so many billions of lives have interacted, that
we can never predict the outcome of what we do.

This is much like prayer. In many prayers, people pray for two
things: 1) what they want, and 2) how they want it. Praying for the
first is understandable and expected. God will answer /every/ urgent
prayer. But the world is complicated by nearly infinite interactions,
and only God understands how they fit together. Only He has a mind
qualified to conceive an answer to 2. When we pray for our desires to be
achieved a certain way, we almost certainly never get what we asked for,
even if 1 is answered!

Desiring change in the world is very similar. When we say, "we want
world peace", we often envision what this will look or feel like.
Example: Muslims prayed for hundreds of years for the Mihdí. God
answered them. The Muslims killed the Mihdí.

Our own life is a microcosm of movements at large in the world. We are
praying for our own Mihdí, usually in the form of wishing for a certain
change in the world. But at the same time, we desire this change to take
a certain shape, flavor, or course; maybe a certain speed, manner, or
approach. And when the desired change arrives, it's never exactly what
we desired.

Look at people who want a certain wife, husband or career. The number of
truly happy people that I know is zero. All of them complain in some way
about the next set of changes they want. Even those who have
accomplished what they set out to do! Because at the moment of
accomplishment, it's never exactly what they envisioned.

Why do I bring this up? First: to say that change itself has no merit.
It's everywhere, as free as the wind. Second: intending to direct change
is impossible, due to our finite nature. Third: hoping for a particular
outcome of change is impossible, since we cannot anticipate the unknown.

And yet, change is a necessary, fruitful part of life. This all leads me
to one conclusion: the focus of our life should be something other than
change! This means living intensely in the present.

Lest someone suggest that this attitude precludes effective change, I
will ask, what does it mean to live in the present?

If I am living in the present, I am acutely aware of my current
circumstances, and what is around me. If cricket is trapped indoors, I
see it, feel its pain echoed in my own heart, and release it. Not
because I desire a different world, one in which the cricket does not
suffer; but because his suffering is my suffering, and so I respond
naturally, much as I might have scratched an itch.

If I meet someone starving for love, do I give them love to change their
unloved state of being? Do I hate their unloved state so much that I
must destroy it, to create a loved state? After all, God's creation, at
that moment, included an unloved individual. Whatever the past may have
been, it is natural that /right now/ this person is experiencing no
love. Therefore, it is what it is.

Perceiving this, I feel a natural desire to respond to their need. Their
need is my need, since we are both human, both creatures of God, both
hungry for love. I offer them love not because they need it, but because
the situation brings it forth from me. Loving the present, the shape of
my love flows to fit the needs of the moment, and at this particular
moment, the response is one of caring. At other times, it may be
appreciation, excitement, respect, etc.

Change will always happen; but seeking change is empty. Merely by
allowing my own being to exist naturally, positive change will occur
around me. It cannot happen otherwise. If you poke me, I will exclaim.
If I see suffering, I'll desire to undo it. If I hear a question, I'll
want to answer it. Not because of a certain future I wish to uncover,
but because your question is my question; we are both walking on the
same path.

Then, there is change for the sake of change, and change that is the
natural outcome of responding to one's circumstances. Is it an invasion
to be myself? If so, then everything is an invasion: time, the sun's
light, everything. An invasion is when a foreign element seeks to enter
something unnaturally. Like when I want to create love as a response to
hate, without love being the origin of my motive. It's like trying to
force a pill down the throat of the present, in order to win a better
future. This is fruitless, hopeless.

Also, the present is perfect as it is. We will always exist in the
present. This is where our trials occur, our joys, our opportunity for
perceiving the divine. When people describe it as "immature", or
"undeveloped", I think to myself: people will always see it that way. In
a thousand years, people will still castigate the present the way we do
now. People were doing this a thousand years ago. The present /never/
seems perfect to us. Always, always, always, people look to the future
for fulfillment. Either in their life, their job, their spirituality,
whatever.

That's the flaw. Civilization is not going to become perfect, or better.
Because no matter how long we wait, "better" keeps getting redefined at
every stage. Compared to half a million years ago, we are the ultimate
society! So why aren't we all dancing and having parties? Because
comparative judgment suffers from the flaw of arbitrary selection: you
can pick whatever view of the present you wish, depending on whether you
look forward or backward. People who do this will continue to do this.
The present will always appear the same in a relative way. Its details
may alter, but it remains essentially the same to the person who looks
at it.

The only way to break this cycle is to fundamentally alter our
relationship to the present. Not to the past or the future, but the
present. Change is bound up in time, and does not exist in the present.
Neither does love or light exist in the past or future. Love is our
spirit's response to the world we see before us -- period. We don't
become more loving by waiting for better circumstances.

Let me reword that last point: Change happens in time, but love happens
outside of time. Therefore, love occurs before change. Change cannot
bring about love. If we love, change will happen from that love; if we
hate, change will happen from that hate. Change itself is ambivalent,
universal, impersonal.

To create true change, then, we must love the present that we see before
us. This present is perfect, and without flaw; only our perceptions make
us think otherwise. And if we love the present unreservedly /wonderful
changes will flow naturally from that love/. Not as an invasion, but as
a mystic dance in partner with everything around us.

Accepting the present is the hardest thing, because it doesn't happen in
the mind or heart. Only spiritual change can affect the way we view the
present; only eyes of faith can see beyond what is apparent, and
perceive the mystic unity of opposites that our body's eyes can never
see.

So, how do I love existence? To me, that is most fundamental of all
questions. Here I am, one who has listened to religion. Religion tells
me: love all that is. I ask it right back: how do I love all that is?
Because from this, every other thing precedes. If I love all things,
there is nothing that will not solve itself in time. If people loved all
things, war would be impossible; social inequality would be impossible,
prejudice would be impossible. The world's transformation occurs when
people learn to love, which is the purpose of religion.

If this is religion's purpose, then maybe religion is necessary for it
to occur. If a philosophy, drug, or experience could make me love all
things, it would be the easiest thing to do. My mind works well enough
to read any book in time; I could easily swallow a drug, or seek an
experience.

But love is the hardest thing, the most basic thing, and yet somehow the
easiest thing. Because the possibility of accomplishing it is /in the
present/. It's always right here. There's no book I need to read, or
experience I need to have. All of the ingredients are right here, right
now. Time is not required for such a change, nor wealth nor ability nor
circumstance. Somehow, I exist "but one step away". "Swift as the
twinkling of an eye ye can, if ye but wish it, reach and partake of this
imperishable favor, this God-given grace, this incorruptible gift, this
most potent and unspeakably glorious bounty."

Then the answer must be something marvelous, glorious -- beyond time and
space and future and change and argument. Something that requires only a
timeless moment of realization. A call to God, a moment of quiet, a
single effort -- who knows what will burn up the veil?

What I am certain of is this: if my energy is bled away seeking a change
whose ramifications I could never master, which would more likely than
not cause more sorrow than joy, then I will have no heart left to seek
this ineffable path. The desire for change is the beginning of all
suffering, says Buddhism. To be freed from this desire causes the heart
to awaken, and when it does, the love proceeding from this realization
washes over everything around you.
