:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       E5FDA441-CB90-404F-ADAB-F3B7FC3B94B9
:SLUG:     christianity-and-damnation
:END:
#+filetags: :essays:
#+title: Christianity and damnation

Christianity has always seemed to me to offer religion as an alternative
to damnation. Follow Christ, because through Him your sins will be
forgiven. This is a very welcome message to anyone who feels inherently
guilty. The doctrine of original sin then seems to make complete sense.
And so we are carried into the organization, to be baptized, and to
breathe a great sigh of relief for now we are saved.

But please read this for what it is: the initial perceptions of a child
of fourteen, who could not understand the whole concept of latent sin,
and therefore gave up the entire prospect of religion. This is the time
when I became an atheist.

The doctrines of honesty and kindness were easy enough, because as long
as one follows them (and they are quite simple in their rules), one is
justifiably beyond reproach. Violating them means that the scales of
justice must be rebalanced, but once that is done, again one is OK.

Against such a model, religion seems to set up an incredibly complicated
system, where honesty, kindness and the other virtues are merely part of
some larger game, whose rules we were never meant to understand. Somehow
we accept the fact that we are by default "in the wrong," that the
scales can never be rebalanced by our own efforts, and that we therefore
stand in need of an All-Powerful, external Being Who will allow us to
escape the punishment we were otherwise destined for.

Yet even this is not guaranteed -- at least in the brands of
Christianity I was familiar with growing up. Consorting with the wrong
kind of people could just as easily send you to hell as giving up the
church. Faced with this impermanent salvation, I again discovered that
the scales were forever off-balance, and that the omnipotent deity who
was to secure my rescue demanded constant propitiation in order to keep
up his end of the bargain. In this respect modern "ecclesiastical"
religion is no different from the ancient cultures who make sacrifices
to the gods each year in order to ensure a steady crop. If we let down
our guard, the deities are immediately going to return to the realms
whence they came, and then we are left on our own. Completely on our
own. And needless to say, because of our imperfection, and the fact that
the scales of Justice forever demand rebalancing, it's no longer
possible to continue living without that deity's protection.

This is such a simple, "pray for the rains" theology that it is
surprising how inveterate it has become, even in the belief systems of
modern day. With the advent of Christ, it became more glorified, and
more intricate, but at heart the formula is identical. Man is bad, and
does not deserve. God covers for man, and now man can live acceptably.
But man must continue to implore God, or God will leave man, and man
will perish.

Isn't this the idea of those street-corner preachers who say, "Repent,
for the end is near!"? The idea of expiating guilt is so attractive for
anyone who feels guilty (and I am certain that many of us feel guilty
about /something/, for life is a thing of mistakes), that it becomes a
very strong selling point. And perhaps this is why the current
generation has become so heedless: because they are aware of this "moral
economics" and are disgusted by the fact that the only real result is
that the church gets fatter every year. Now that their sins are
forgiven, so what? They have to live in constant apprehension of drawing
all those sins back again with the least transgression. It's like a
judge who suspends one's sentence at court. The individual feels somehow
lucky, but now he is afraid that on the next occasion he will have to
pay for both the old sin and the new one. This is not a very complete
salvation. At least not given the time and money that it costs.

Some sects offer permanent salvation. Once you have accepted Christ as
Lord, this is both the beginning and the end. Do what you like, for your
faith has saved you. Of course, you should still try to be good, but it
doesn't really matter all that much. The only catch here is that you
have at accept Him through a particular church, and remain a member of
that church. I'm not very experienced with these kinds of churches, but
it surprises me that they aren't more popular.

The thing to notice here is that all of the focus is on the suppliant.
Where is God mentioned, except as the Saviour of the otherwise
hell-bound soul? Isn't He, after all, the Creator, the Source of all
Good, the Knower and the Seer? It would seem that if religion were
anything, it would be a source of knowledge about /Him/, since no other
science or art can tell us anything about Him directly.

This is the special purview of religion, this authoritative knowledge of
God. Church is where one goes to discover the mysterious fact that there
is another world beyond this world, one based on love and fellow
feeling, rather than brute force and power. All these things were
created by God, Who has placed more capacities within us than we are yet
aware of, and Who has much more in store for us then we have witnessed
so far. The key is to make ready our perception so that we might be
capable of comprehending the deeper mysteries of life. This requires a
purifying our mind, turning our sight away from baser things, directing
our inquiry to the soul and its needs, and providing it with the
nourishment it requires to develop the capabilities it has been endowed
with.

Nothing but religion can educate us about the needs of the soul, for
only God understands these needs, and so only God can tell us about
them. This He does through the mechanism of His Messengers, or Prophets,
sent is just such a fashion that only those who are truly interested
will listen long enough to find out what they have to offer. This is
done because Beauty is only for the eyes of those who will appreciate
it. Think of something astonishingly beautiful, and special, in your own
life. Maybe this would be a sunset viewed from a particular spot, or the
enveloping silence of a certain grove at a nearby beach. Now consider
who you would bring there, to share your special place. Would it be just
any one, no matter how crass or insensitive? Or would you reserve those
places for only those people who possess the sensibilities necessary to
apprehend what was being offered?

God, too, has something wonderful to share with us something that is
open to all. But only those whole hearts are ready can enter, because
otherwise it would be waste, like a painting created for a blind man.
This He achieves by tailoring His message with exactly the right amount
of craft, such that it be ignored, or cherished, based on the
predilection of the hearer.

But my point is that religion is about God, and not about the question
of our salvation. This plays a part, but not as expiation of our sins;
rather it is about removing those obstacles which would prevent from
perceiving His beauty. This is what is meant by salvation; to be awaken
from a slumber which would have caused you to miss all the wonderful
glory of life.
