:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       EFD38BE0-1266-45D4-A3EE-A518DA021A2A
:SLUG:     thoughts-on-homosexual-acts
:END:
---
title: Thoughts on homosexual acts
tags: essays
---

We know for certain the Bahá'í Faith disallows homosexual copulation.
What I cannot see is how this implies anything except that He found such
an act incommensurate with the needs of our age. Whether it will always
be so is not within our knowledge.

Muhammad forbade His followers to eat pork. Did this make pork eaters
"sick" (no pun intended), or evil? It was a commandment made at the
time, which was later repealed. The Manifestation has full authority
over such matters. Morality is defined in reference to His Law, not by
our personal feelings of what is "good" or "right".

After some simple-hearted thought on this matter, I came to the
following conclusions:

1. A practicing homosexual is no more deviant than anyone else who
   disobeys the Law. If any of us failed to read from the Writings this
   morning, hey! we just entered the same boat. I have no quotations to
   back up this statement. I make it from the negative, since the only
   statement of "doing this is worse than doing that" I have ever seen
   has to do with murder and backbiting.

2. Do I shun my friends who drink, or who have sex before marriage? Do I
   even think about such things, unless they choose to do them in front
   of me?

3. The matter is one of personal decision, unless it affects the name of
   the Faith, in which case administrative sanctions might be employed.
   Even then, it is ultimately an individual matter. It is not like
   murder, or theft, which harms another's livelihood.

4. If there is any wrongness, it will be addressed between God and that
   individual at the time of reckoning. Unless we ourselves have nothing
   to fear from that day, we should seriously avoid debating the
   goodness of other people.

We are all human. Things we personally abhor, when we find that God has
also disallowed them, we have a tendency to become vigilant against --
whether we do so consciously or not. It as though the Law gives us
justification for our judgmental attitudes.

But such attitudes are manifestly false according to Bahá'í teachings.
The fact that this issue is so controversial among /us/ shows only our
own immaturity: not the "sinfulness" of those people who have a bent
toward lovers of their own gender.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
O Children of Men! Know ye not why We created you all from the same
dust? That no one should exalt himself over the other. Ponder at all
times in your hearts how ye were created. Since We have created you all
from one same substance it is incumbent on you to be even as one soul,
to walk with the same feet, eat with the same mouth and dwell in the
same land, that from your inmost being, by your deeds and actions, the
signs of oneness and the essence of detachment may be made manifest.
Such is My counsel to you, O concourse of light! Heed ye this counsel
that ye may obtain the fruit of holiness from the tree of wondrous
glory.

#+END_QUOTE

If someone wishing to participate in homosexual sex also wishes to obey
Bahá'u'lláh, they have a dilemma on their hands; and I don't think any
of us should underestimate the displeasure of that situation. If
anything, what is needed is support, and a constant remembrance that
such abstinence is not without purpose.

This is perhaps what makes this issue so difficult: we focus on it out
of context. The Law is our guide and our light in the darkness. The
wisdom of it we may never learn until the final moment. But why is it a
part of our lives at all? I would think this is a much better question
to ponder and debate.

I leave with the sentiment of these words written by Bahá'u'lláh,
revealed in the Sufi tradition of insight into the mundane -- in this
case the letters of the word Gunjishk (G N J SH K), meaning "sparrow".
They seem to point to the very heart of morality: not that some are
evil, and some are good; but that in order for our souls to fly free, we
must unload ourselves of all encumbrance.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Kaf or Gaf (K or G) referreth to Kuffi ("free"), that is, "Free thyself
from that which thy passion desireth; then advance unto thy Lord."

Nun (N) referreth to Nazzih ("purify"), that is, "Purify thyself from
all else save Him, that thou mayest surrender thy life in His love."

Jim (J) is Janib ("draw back"), that is, "Draw back from the threshold
of the True One if thou still possessest earthly attributes."

Shin (SH) is Ushkur ("thank") -- "Thank thy Lord on His earth that He
may bless thee in His heaven; albeit in the world of oneness, this
heaven is the same as His earth."

Kaf (K) referreth to Kuffi, that is: "Take off from thyself the
wrappings of limitations, that thou mayest come to know what thou hast
not known of the states of Sanctity."

Wert thou to harken to the melodies of this mortal Bird, then wouldst
thou seek out the undying chalice and pass by every perishable cup.

Peace be upon those who walk in the Right Path!

#+END_QUOTE
