:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       90840A28-1F23-4683-9188-1FE852DC4A9C
:SLUG:     social-wealth
:END:
#+filetags: :essays:
#+title: Social wealth

It seems to me that most people in a position of wealth do not know what
to do with that wealth. I include myself among this number, and realize
that I have never been taught what to do with wealth. Up to a certain
amount, I do know what to do. Rent, food, fuel, retirement savings --
all these seem appropriate, and worth the money I spend. But beyond that
point -- which for some represents less than half their income -- what
should the remainder be spent on?

The question is deceptively simple, because it is the perception of
everyone that "you can never make enough money." But really, beyond
acquiring objects for personal pleasure, what can constructively be done
with excess wealth? Man is a social element as well as an individual,
and the problem of wealth seems to span both sides. The first part is
taken care of by a usually fixed sum of money from year to year, because
realistically our personal needs do not fluctuate very much. If we do
tend to consume money at an ever-increasing rate, perhaps it is the
signal of an addiction, or energy being spent trying to run away from
something. Otherwise, given moderate tastes (neither ascetic,
abstemious, lavish or wasteful), the amount we need to maintain
ourselves individually is economically constant (meaning that changes
are more due to fluctuations in the value of the currency employed, than
in the quantity or quality of the goods obtained).

Once the individual aspect is taken care of, the excess becomes a
problem. In actuality, I haven't a clue what to do with this money. I
don't mean that I can't think of ways of getting rid of it (the Fund,
cars, entertainment, etc.). What I mean is that I was never educated in
terms of my role as a social element, and what role this "unused wealth"
plays in the social context.

There are three options usually taken. The first, and most common, is to
expend this additional sum on the individual aspect as well. There are
certainly more ways of getting rid of wealth than can ever be exhausted.
I have personally watch people buy new cars merely for the sake of
getting something new.

The second is less common, which is to change the hands of this wealth,
usually through philanthropy, or donating it to an organization. Then
the problem of properly expending it socially is no longer the concern
of the individual. This is probably the best course to take if one is
not willing to understand the problem for themselves, and may even still
be the best course to take after understanding the problem. But my whole
question is not what to spend the money on, but what is meaning of
social wealth. If I am going to defer all of my wealth to charity, I
want to do so consciously with the understanding that I am not merely
shirking my responsibility and handing the money off for someone else to
deal with, but I have actually understood that by deferring I am
fulfilling my responsibility.

The third is probably the least common, which is to do nothing. Just let
the money accumulate unchecked. I have met some people who fall into
this category.

In all three cases there the underlying thread that citizens are not
taught what do with their "social wealth" (wealth that exists after all
genuine personal needs and desires are taken care of).

Now, I do not understand this problem. What is the reality of social
wealth? What can I spend it on? What should I do with it? If I just
accumulate it, then society loses the benefit. If I spend it
unconsciously, then I am just handing off the problem. Possibly I may be
handing it off to the right person, but if I do so unconsciously, then I
never really know.
