:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       F4A9F9EA-B300-4373-B4FE-91F524D17B13
:SLUG:     planning-for-life
:END:
---
title: Planning for life
tags: journal
---

Of what does a life consist? Written in hopes of finding a better way to
plan my activities:

At this point in my life, the entire goal of my existence is the
unfettered experience of an indefinable thing I term "Quality", whose
context of appearance is as variable as life itself. It has no
recognizable features other than its own essence, and it seems to appear
variously for different people. The one thing in common is the
experience itself, which each person has to seek out on an individual
basis. At the same time, however, Quality can arise from a certain group
dynamic, or between two people, or an infinitude of ways. So there is no
particular "way" that defines my search, but only the essential
experience itself. There are probably innumerable ways to find it, and
all of them are equally valid in that one respect. There is even a
special quality in leading others to experience it; its ways and forms
are without number.

The search for quality must begin with maintenance: Activity to allow
for more activity. This kind of labor is an investment in the future,
though if the task itself reveals quality, it falls into a different
category. When the maintenance of my life coincides with my goal, such
as making money by doing something I love, it is pure joy.

Once life is set to continue (for my part), the next task is learning
where quality can be found, and pursuing it. This takes on too many
forms to even mention, although it can be hard to find at first. One
never knows without searching where quality will be found, just as a
lover cannot find his beloved who does not step out of his house.
Sometimes I am surprised by the places where I find quality -- even
finding it where I don't wish to! But since quality is the goal, and not
the medium, it pays to keep one's eyes open, and expectations to a
minimum.

A worthwhile task is the elimination from life of whatever does not
match one's goal. With respect to maintenance, this means exchanging
quality-less modes of operation with those that exhibit quality in their
own right. I found a way to do this for showering myself, for example,
by finding an olive oil soap that I feel so much in love with, that now
I look forward to taking a shower every day. When every single act of
every day is joyful, and we look forward to the experience of being
alive, then I think the fruits of good planning are shining through.

Perhaps planning, then, is simply the application of intellect to the
question of how to organize life toward our goal. The more exclusively
this is done, the more fulfilling each act will be -- since our actions
more and more purely lead to fulfillment. Loss of energy in unproductive
activity (in respect to the goal) can only cause fatigue, and a sense
that life's possibilities are being wasted.

How to implement this as a plan? Since I am using
[[http://www.llamagraphics.com/LB/ThirtyDayTrialP.html][Life Balance]]
to architect my search for quality, I will describe things in those
terms. First of all, the programs want me to list the tasks that are
immediate to my goal, and then to break those down into smaller tasks,
until I reach the point where each task can be done in a fairly short
period of time. This results in a branching tree of tasks with parent,
short-term goals, all leading toward my overall goal. The top goal is
called "My life as a whole", which in my case means "The search for
quality". Since anything else is a waste, I will create a category
called "Wasted time". That way, if anything does not fit into my plan, I
will have a place to put it that reminds me of its role within the plan.
The object of "Wasted time" is to remove the need for having such a
category at all.

The top level items, in terms of seeking quality, would be: "Look for
quality", or actively looking for experiences where I can find quality.
It is here that I would plan on buying tickets for a symphony I've never
heard, or visit new places, or make new friends. I don't know yet what I
will find there, but exposure is always the best way to improve one's
chances.

In cases where I have found quality, I next want to strengthen my
relationship to whatever it was that led me there, in hopes of taking me
there again. If I hear a beautiful symphony, for example, I will want to
find a good recording, buy a better sound system, learn more about the
composer, etc. This is a cycle of enrichment, and fosters the growth of
whatever seeds I've found. I would call this category "Improve
capacity". It includes the development of tools, the purchase of means,
the maintenance of beneficial connections, etc. The improvement might be
something that enhances the experience, or facilitates the creation of
new experiences based on a similar theme.

Once capacity is honed, there is only one step left: making use of that
capacity: to enjoy the quality it reveals, or exercise its abilities in
creating new forms of quality. So "Enjoy quality" is where I plan
experiences I know will offer just that -- though in a passive context;
while "Create quality" is a higher mode, in which the quality
experienced is from my own hand. Everything is a build-up to this end of
reveling in quality. Ideally, even "Maintain life" should differ from
"Enjoy quality" only in the matter of necessity.

Such enjoyment takes its highest form, for me, in the act of artistic
creation, especially when that art has a productive end -- such as
writing computer programs which can, themselves, be used to further
these goals. In that case, all aspects of my humanity merge together in
act whose mode of expression is joyful, whose result is joyful, and
which result conduces to the future extension and refinement of that
joy. This sort of cycle, where each element separately fulfills the
goal, and all of them together further that goal, is evidence of genuine
progress in realizing my purpose of a complete and continuing experience
of quality.

And of course, there must be a category called "Maintain life", which is
not negotiable, whether its contents contribute to the goal or not. Some
of these would more properly fall under "Wasted time", except that they
cannot be avoided; while others are really "Improve capacity" in the
strictest sense, but with an importance that cannot be ignored -- since
doing so would negatively effect every other entry in the plan, whereas
the reverse is not true.

Where does serving others come in? By referring to the spiritual concept
of [[file:j2004#collectiveconsciousness][reflexivity]] -- that one is
all, and all are one -- then aiding others to find and dive into quality
is identical with doing so for myself. It is not the pursuit of
individual joy that fulfills my goal, but simple the pursuit of joy in
itself. Wherever there is more spirit manifest in the world, my goal is
accomplished. Perhaps the overall goal could be expressed as "Brighten
the world", but since I believe this happens whenever the human heart
experiences quality, and since all hearts are truly one heart, I have
expressed the above plan in terms immediately applicable to the life
under my control: my own.

It is very interesting, now, looking at my original list of tasks and
fitting them into these goal-directed categories. It is not always
obvious what should go where; although it is clear that no other
categories need to be introduced. The inability to categorize something
in these terms shows that I am not yet myself clear in how it relates to
my goal. I think I will move everything unclear into "Wasted time", and
let time decide whether it should be moved into a nobler category. For
some of them, already I ask myself: Is this an experience quality? Does
it assist the experience of quality? Will it lead me to an experience of
quality? If the answer to all three is "no", then why ever am I doing
it?
