:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       8E7C2B8E-915D-4DE4-8BC9-C7995A8C73CB
:SLUG:     the-movement-of-being
:END:
---
title: The movement of being
tags: journal
---

A fellow wayfarer in the wilds of the mind wrote:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
You can seek to move towards pleasure and away from pain without losing
the appreciation of the symphony that is both or losing the deep
understanding of their interdependence.

#+END_QUOTE

To express my agreement with this statement: Both pleasure and pain are
equal parts of a unity which might be called "the being of feeling".
This being includes pain, pleasure, the feeler, the object producing the
feeling, and the setting in which it occurs. It is all of these things.

But this only pictures that unity within a single moment of time. The
being of feeling also includes the movement of feeling, which is the
avoidance of pain and the pursuit of pleasure. All that "pain" means is,
"a feeling we seek to avoid." It is "pain" because of our aversion, and
"pleasure" because of our attraction.

So to avoid pain is also the being of feeling; it is part of the drama
that makes up feeling. The attractive nature of pleasure would not be as
sweet if there were not other feelings to repel us just as strongly.
Pulled between like and dislike, these opposites become part of another
being, perhaps "the being of desire". Without attraction and repulsion,
the being of feeling would be disconnected from the being of desire.

The critical difference lies in whether we love the being of feeling as
a unity, or only some of its parts. Take for example the contrast
between good and evil: A being arises which is both good and evil, as
well as the movement of championing good and battling against evil.
However, without evil -- though we seek to defeat it -- the greater
unity of which they're a part would not /be/ (in the sense of becoming a
being of consciousness). The champion of good, whose true love is this
greater being, will honor evil even as he defeats it for the role it
plays toward that being.

Another example: Illness and health are, together, the being of life,
which is a constant movement from birth to decay. A doctor who serves
the being of life, plays his role by championing health and fighting
disease. However, it is critical to the being of life that he not
succeed completely. If a doctor were able to eliminate all illness from
birth, he would leave the patient incapable of facing other, unknown
illnesses that also exist in the world. By granting perfect health, the
patient would cease to be robust, and thus real health a would be
impossible.

For a genuinely healthy person must face illness. It is never desirable
to seek to become ill -- part of the movement of the being of life is
that we encourage health and promote illness -- but without facing
illness, a person could not be hardy. A doctor who strives for the being
of life will champion health, but also honor illness for the role it
plays in that being. /It is because we fall ill at times, that we are
healthy the rest of the time/. In this way, as a unity, the being of
life is able to be.

The same with pleasure and pain. If we desire to feel deeply, we must
seek out pleasure and avoid pain, /but also honor pain when it comes/,
because it must come if we are to really feel. If we grow too
comfortable with pleasure, to the point of feeling nothing at all, we
(or God) must push us from our confinement to seek other pleasures, an
activity which carries the risk of encountering other pains. To be truly
alive -- a lover of life -- we must embrace all the parts of experience,
honoring them for their role, even if the function of those roles seems
contradictory.

I am not saying pain and pleasure are equal, or to be regarded equally.
Such an identity would end the very being I refer to! The idea is that
all parts -- even those whose roles are diametrically opposed -- /are
together that being/. The movement of being means relating both to the
parts (avoiding pain and preferring pleasure) and the whole
(appreciating that both pain and pleasure are the life of feeling). In
this way we honor injustice even as we strive to defeat it; we honor
illness even as we develop medicines to counter it; we honor pain even
as we take steps to avoid it. In fact, if we did not seek to avoid pain,
we would be denying its role in the fuller aspect of its being! If
everything were pleasant, feeling would start to diminish. So the love
of being is a love of all its parts, even if some of the roles of those
parts demand that we fight against them.[fn:1]

Since some of the parts of unity require the behavior of opposition, we
see how necessary it is to being that we fail at times. Without
imperfection, there could not be a consciousness of the higher being of
which imperfection and perfection are both a part. That is, it may be
the role of imperfection that I constantly seek to improve it, but it is
also necessary to that greater being that sometimes I fail at this task.
If ever I were to perfect my elimination of imperfection, I would also
eliminate the unity I seek, since it is by imperfection that its being
becomes known to me.

This does not mean that I will not continue, for the rest of my life, to
seek perfection. The /movement/ of the greater being of perfection and
imperfection is that I struggle from one to the other. But it does mean
that I will honor imperfection, even love it for the role it plays in
making me conscious of my goal -- /even if that love is expressed by my
seeking to undo imperfection/; for by seeking to undo imperfection, I
play my role in the movement of being.

This is fundamentally a philosophy of love, where even hate is loved
because both hate and love together -- and the lover, the beloved, and
all the other parts -- make up the greater unity to which this
philosophy addresses itself. The being of true love could not be known
without hateful things to test it (see "The steed of pain", below).
Thus, what is hateful is also loved, because its role in the being of
love is that love will seek to overcome hatred with itself.

This is a world-view in which destruction and upbuilding are both one
being. It does not matter that building destroys destruction, or that
destruction lays the foundation for building. The two principles are, in
their separateness, opposed; but as parts of a higher unity, they are
interdependent. The two are intimately bound; just as with the Yin-Yang,
they are two, but two aspects of one symbol, two sides of a single coin.
They depend on each other, even though that dependence requires the
giving way of each to the rise of the other.

As separate parts this could never make sense. The parts describe a
universe fundamentally at odds with itself, an unresolvable paradox. But
as members of a common unity, the parts are shown to serve the being of
something more than themselves -- which is also themselves. Through
their opposition, the many in fact fulfill the being of the One.

It requires such a higher unity to resolve these warring parts, or else
the paradox would never end. If creation and destruction are always at
odds, as they must be, how can there ever be harmony? It is in the
higher unity -- the being of which these two are a part, and which they
express by their conflict -- that resolution is found. If that be the
case, it argues for a resolution of all the manyness and inexplicability
of life in a greater unity encompassing them all: a unity that includes
temporality, limitation and finitude, as well as eternity, boundlessness
and the infinite. Whatever that being is, it is what all this chaos and
paradox refers to, in which they must all find their fulfillment.

[fn:1] In the sense of wishing it never to be.
