:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       0C525E1C-D1F0-4E1F-849E-C30BE8D7F773
:SLUG:     my-thanks
:END:
---
title: My thanks
tags: journal
---

What if I had never been born? What if I had never known what love felt
like? To my Creator, I can only offers thanks from the bottom of my
heart. How much sorrow there has been, year after year. But now I know,
from that pain, what beauty it is for love to exist. He made my heart
into a sensitive organ, until now I can see in the moment of an "I love
you", a deeper reality that leaves me stunned in awe. If only I could
give up my soul for everyone to know what I refer to, I would still not
be short-changed, because for those moments I did know it. That alone is
my real life. I am beyond death now, of a sort, because I live in
knowing that love is there to be found.

My thanks to the girls and the friends who pushed me over the edge, and
taught me that on the other side of madness lies something divine. To
every woman I have ever ached for: You brought me face to face with a
God I could understand. You were all my teachers. Even if in my heart I
have learned of other ways, still you introduced me to love.

Now I can summarize my philosophy of life: Whenever you love, you are
God -- just as a mirror becomes the sun when it gazes at the sky. The
seeing and the being are one. You cannot see without love, but when you
do, you become what you see in that vision of things. This is reunion,
in its dynamic form. If you regard others as a parent sees his best
loved child, you will taste of Fatherhood in that moment.
