:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       C347B0D6-3AB9-4BE9-ACF7-1E8099ECCA7B
:SLUG:     a-light-in-the-dark
:END:
#+filetags: :essays:
#+title: A Light in the Dark

People have asked me at times why I don't do certain things it seems I
should. In simplest terms, it's usually because I'm busy doing something
else. But in the truest sense, I don't do these other things because
they do not make me happy. And if someone says, "but for this or that
reason you ought to do it anyway", my feeling is: if it causes me
happiness, whatever it is, I want nothing to do with it.

This goes to the extreme limit, where if God Himself were to make me
unhappy, I would turn my back on Him. I say this, because it is crucial
to understand how important joy is. It is like light; and if something
in your life claims to be the Sun, yet increases darkness -- it is not
the sun. "God" is just a word, after all. That men could slave
themselves to a concept without jduging its effect makes no sense.
Rather, we must understand what the signs of "God" should be, so that if
we find these sings we know we're on the right track. And conversely,
when those signs are absent, then we have yet to find the God we're
looking for.

The mind is not the place to define God, because it's capable of wanting
what it desires despite every outcome. All senseless war comes from this
capacity of the mind to invent its own objectives. What we need, then,
is a faculty which cannot be deceived, and that we may trust to guide us
faithfully on the journeys of our inward life, such that we do not
accept any substitutes.

Love is like this. It cannot be fooled. It is still fallible in the
virtues of its object, but it is infallible with regard to its own
truth. Simply put, being in love cannot be faked.

If the presence of love is dependable, but its object is not, we still
need something to prove our orientation. Is our life going wrongly? Is
there something more we should know?

When love, even fallible love, is first fulfilled, there comes with it
an ecstasy that alone had bred and kept whole legions of poets. This
feeling of "communion", or joining, is a proof that love has found its
object -- whatever the nature of that desired one may be.

But let us suppose that the better the goal love is aimed toward, the
finer, more exalted, and more complete the feeling of communion should
be. If we allow this, then "God" may be defined as "He Who offers the
most perfect communion possible", and the soul as "that in man which
desires such a communion." That is, the soul is evidenced by our desire
to be happy, and God, by the discovery of such happiness.

With this understanding, whatever God we believe in may be judged
according to our own state in relationship with Him. If even worldly
lovers exceed the joys we find in Divinity, this proves that what we
believe in is not divine; at least, not we have accepted in the name of
"God".

Likewise, religion, if its purpose is to draw us nearer the one true
God, must aid in forming this perfect communion. So that if there is no
joy, there is no true religion. If we were to follow a text on romance
that founded no relationship, we ought to throw it away. At least, our
reading must be wrong; because the proof of anything is in the fruit it
offers. If such fruit is absent, it is worthless thing, and
misadvertised.

If another person questions these definitions of God and soul, I am
interested to know what he seeks from a different God -- possessing as
he must a different soul. To me, happiness is the one quality that gives
meaning to existence. In the midst of that state, I need nothing else,
or any eternity, because that one instant is both beginning and end --
and hence beyond all time or boundaries.

But if one agree with these definitions, he is compelled to judge fairly
the aims and pursuits of his life in such terms. That is, if one possess
a "soul" who desires happiness; and if this soul yearns for a "God" Who
fulfills that happiness to the utmost degree; then it is admitted that
happiness is the point round which these terms revolve: the pivot of
their dance, as it were: the heart of their turning on the wheel of
events.

Whenever happiness is increased, it means these two endpoints are
drawing nearer; and whenever joy is absent, their distance should be
inferred. If we pursue the mystical path -- by which I mean, a life
lived for the sake of such a soul finding such a God -- -then happiness
is the criterion to show progress or decline. To the successful soul,
his happiness will increase day by day, and by definition he will know
rejoicing only insofar as he draws nearer his Aim. On the other hand, a
soul who has strayed far from its path may know this by the emptiness,
the draining fatigue, the gathering weariness that threatens to crush
his life.

For these reasons, not only should we never underestimate the role of
joy in our spiritual life, but must know it as our compass, our proof,
our sustaining confirmation. If not, then what God do we seek? What does
that God offer that we should continue, without the glory of His
presence to draw us onward?
