:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       286CF62E-F84D-44F3-BEA9-5B30D1F8F256
:SLUG:     pragmatism-and-value
:END:
#+filetags: :essays:
#+title: Pragmatism and value

A theme in society that has often bothered me is that which says, "what
is not pragmatic, is not useful".

I notice this greatly in relationship to art. Art is not respected
because its product is not easily defined. Indeed, it has short-term
benefit only for those able to appreciate it -- most of its societal
benefit being in the long-term.

One reaction I see in the world to the idea of a "romantic" journey
(that is, to run off from the rest of the world and contemplate life) is
that it is not pragmatic, and hence ultimately useless.

Interestingly enough, it is possible to view "romantic" as being related
to "artistic". That is, its benefit is hard to define, and what benefit
there /is/ is only visible to those in a position to appreciate it; and
the actual societal "product" will only be realized in the long-term.

The typical social reaction to anything having those characteristics is
distrust and disregard. In minor things, such as writing or painting --
when it is not the primary source of income -- is pretty much ignored,
since what real harm can it have? If that's how the person has fun...

But when it comes to placing art, and the need for art, as primary in
one's life, then society seems to try to rush to the person's rescue: to
save them from themselves. What the artist is trying to attempt is
scorned (in subtle, or not-so-subtle words), and he is persuaded to
abandon his attempt because "it is not useful" -- mainly because it is
"not pragmatic": there is no direct, concrete product associated with
his intentions. How is he going to benefit the world by the plans that
he has?

This same pragmatism seems to deny the pursuit of anything for its own
sake. Knowledge for knowledge sake, or virtue for virtue sake. It always
has to have an end, and the end must be visible and well-defined. Such
pragmatism denies any optimism in the face of life's many sorrows; it
ignores the hidden potentials which are only a veil's-width from our
realization; it condemns as foolish or ultimately idiotic anything done
purely for the sake of some hidden or invisible beauty, of which most
people are unaware.

Now, I do not think that most people openly subscribe to this view. That
is why I call it a "social more". Perceptual models seem to defend
themselves: they /use/ human minds to propagate, almost like a virus
attaching itself to a host. And the person, even despite their own hopes
and desires, may find themselves vehemently declaring the social more as
incontestable, merely because it has become such an inseparable aspect
of their /Weltanschauung/.

I see the societal models trying to curtail my efforts toward beauty at
every step. It is /constantly/ telling me that I should basically just
keep quiet and continue working away at my job; that I should find a
nice wife, buy a nice home, and ultimately just settle down to die.

The point where it becomes unacceptable for me is that something deep
within me is positively screaming for some kind of change. Whenever I
behold things that express true beauty, I am seized by such a transport
of glorious joy that I keep saying to myself, "I will not live my life
the way that other people do." The role of art has become an obsession,
and my soul requires nourishment from the storehouses that it offers.

Of course, the result is that I am more and more viewed as foolish and
irrelevant in a our highly sophisticated, technological world. My
fascination with ancient Greece, my longing for hardship and dire
simplicity, my thirst for pain to burn away the ugly blackness that is
settling on my soul: all of these have just about won me a front-row
seat in the funny farm.

Can it be that I am really so crazy, and so idiotic? I know that from a
strict social perspective, any intention I may have of giving up my life
for one more dedicated to intangible realities, seems impractical and
pointless. For I certainly will not be able to prove afterwards that I
actually "did" anything.

Yet the soul cries for something. What I do not know, or else I wouldn't
even be wasting my time writing these things down. One thing that I do
know for sure: the accepted social more does not offer me any
substitute. What alternative does the 1997 model of the world offer to
someone who's heart is bursting from day to day? Whose souls groans in
agony at all the irreverent indignities heaped upon it by a heedless and
godless generation? Where is the ethereal fragrance of beauty in such a
world, such as I once felt wafted over my soul while reading the short
stories of D.H. Lawrence?

After thinking about it for a while, it seems possible that the very
reason a "romantic" endeavor is termed such is because "romantic" is
viewed as the atmosphere surrounding "artistic", and whatever is sheerly
artistic, or is not pragmatic, will never conduce to a useful result.
