:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       7C4A06C6-4A5A-4E73-98CB-9936E992C5AB
:SLUG:     taking-things-slowly
:END:
---
title: Taking things slowly
tags: journal
---

There is an exercise I've been working on for the past week, which has
produced very interesting results for me. I mention it here, not to
suggest how others should live, but to share what it has meant for me.

A dear friend of mine observed that my behavior often seemed very "fast"
or "quick": The way I serve food at dinner, wash the dishes, drive my
car. It also shows in my attitude toward relationships (wanting to
figure out everything up front), my chess playing, my approach to work,
etc. In so many areas, in fact, that her mentioning it brought to mind
the tip of an iceberg: something I ought to pay attention to in order to
understand myself better.

One way to better understand ourselves is to do exactly what makes us
most uncomfortable. I don't mean one should live in misery -- far from
it -- but the conflict that arises from discomfort can reveal traits and
ideas that would otherwise remain dormant. So, in reaction to my
friend's observation that I was being fast, I decided to try living life
intentionally slow.

This has brought about an entire "slowness philosophy" -- not unlike
some of the current literature on mindfulness. The main idea is to do
things slowly: Whatever action I take, I consciously slow myself down
until it feels as if I am doing it very slowly.

The first area I tried this in was driving. Not only have I slowed
myself down to driving the speed limit, but even below the speed limit
(when no one is behind me). My reaction was fairly immediate: First of
all, when I drive in terms of where I am going, any speed feels slow.
Even going 90-100 mph on the freeway to Phoenix feels like the miles are
crawling by. This is driving to get somewhere, and it never seems to go
fast enough.

When I slowed down my driving, I had to stop thinking of the goal,
otherwise my progress felt painfully slow -- which is exactly the
feeling I was aiming for. To escape that pain, I had two choices: Speed
up the car, or move my attention elsewhere. Since I didn't want to go
faster, I had to do the latter: to pay attention to the feel of the car,
the music on the radio, the scenery passing by. I noticed that the more
my attention moved from the future (the goal) to the present (where I
was), the faster it felt like I was moving. Until it reached the point
where I was going 30 in a 35, and felt my car was going too fast --
because I couldn't pay attention to the details on the side of the road.

Once slowness had drawn my attention away from the future to focus on
the present, it stopped feeling like slowness. I started to take
pleasure in the action itself, since I was forced to ignore the timing
of the outcome. I tried this with washing dishes, cleaning up my room,
my car, working on my computer -- all with the same result: That the
action itself became more enjoyable, my heart more at peace, and my
attitude more forgiving and appreciative of imperfection. There was a
simple joy that came from these humdrum activities, where before I had
wanted to finish them as quickly as possible -- or avoid them altogether
from the pain of wanting them done with. I was impatient for "real life"
to begin, and so had been ignoring the very meat of life.

Whether others are racing through their life is only for them to say. I
only know that I tend to. My therapist once told me I was a very anxious
person, and probably always would be. It wouldn't surprise me if this
comes from being an introvert with ADHD trying to cope with a complex
world, a society that places so many demands on our time and
capabilities. Whatever the impetus, I have often felt just on the point
of drowning, as if I could never do quite enough, quite quickly enough,
to keep ahead of the pack. Living slowly, however, with deliberate
intention, has shown me a new way of appreciating the minute details of
life.
