:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       BE4AD765-6501-4E26-86CA-A302D91888F6
:SLUG:     the-world-soul
:END:
---
title: The world soul
tags: journal
---

In the [[file:detachment][entry on detachment]], the essential split was
between reality and those of our ideas which obscure that reality. We
must detach, or cut away, from whatever causes us to become separate
from our Goal: thus, detachment leads to reunion, not division.

This thought strikes a cord with something Thoreau wrote. Here, where he
says, "I wanted... to put to rout all that was not life", is what I see
as the very essence of detachment:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
I did not wish to live what was not life, living is so dear; nor did I
wish to practice resignation, unless it was quite necessary. I wanted to
live deep and suck out all the marrow of life, to live so sturdily and
Spartan-like as to put to rout all that was not life, to cut a broad
swath and shave close, to drive life into a corner...

#+END_QUOTE

Prior to this scheme, I had used the metaphor of reflection to describe
this life in comparison to the next: where attributes of the divine are
seen as lambent images upon a pool of water. Without the pool, there
would be no reflection; without the reflection, there would be no
vision. Detachment is not turning away from the pool, but seeing beyond
the apparent color of the water -- to the discovery that higher values
imbue it from /elsewhere/. This both justifies the role of water in
conveying the image, and the independent beauty of the source of that
image. There is no conflict between mundane and divine.

Next is knowing the thing revealed to be the true interest, until the
water is all but forgotten: present, yet invisible, like a polished
mirror contributing nothing to the vision. In terms of the mundane this
is impossible, because everything reflects only a part of the view --
whatever is seen is always colored by its place of reflection. But the
holy texts say that the soul of man is capable of freeing itself from
every impediment, until it perfectly reveals that Light. From the mirror
of the human heart can appear a perfect manifestation of the Divine.

Mystics, such as the Sufis, have so fallen in love with their Beloved
that they wholly forget the mirror in gazing at the beauties within.
Their daily task is to polish its surface, the better to reveal its
forms. Their pursuit of a perfect mirror, through transforming the
heart, is the Straight Path offering access to the Goal. It is the Way.
"O My Brother! A pure heart is as a mirror; cleanse it with the burnish
of love and severance from all save God, that the true sun may shine
within it and the eternal morning dawn. Then wilt thou clearly see the
meaning of `Neither doth My earth nor My heaven contain Me, but the
heart of My faithful servant containeth Me.'[fn:1]"[fn:2]

The glimpses that appear within the mirror have a nourishing quality,
like food, or the quenching power of water -- in the same way that good
things are known to be good, and beautiful things, beautiful: The
difference between an idea and the underlying reality, or a body and the
life that animates it. In this sense, the world is animated by a world
soul, giving life to the qualities we call "wondrous" and "good" --
without which they would be only words.

It is said "... the revelation of my Best-Beloved hath so permeated my
being that He is closer to me than my life-vein"[fn:3]. He is our life!
If light lost its luminance, all color, shapes, and visible objects
would cease to be. The possession of eyes would no longer matter. So
too, if the world soul departed, we would have no "we" to reflect -- a
universal death. Steal the image from the reflecting pool, and nothing
remains to be seen. The animation of the world, in the perception of its
qualities, is a sure evidence that a greater, universal life animates
the body of this existence, with which we possess a very intimate
relationship.

[fn:1] Bahá'u'lláh, Gleanings from the Writings of, p. 185

[fn:2] From the Díván of Ibn-i-Fárid.

[fn:3] Gleanings from the Writings of Bahá'u'lláh, p. 276
