:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       9AF7CA0F-C360-45F3-83BF-505555F4B87B
:SLUG:     whats-with-dominique-francon
:END:
#+filetags: :essays:
#+title: What's with Dominique Francon?

There have been a lot of people asking about the character of Dominique
Francon in the book /The Fountainhead/, by Ayn Rand. This essay will
attempt to clarify her character in the context of that story.

For lack of a better term, let us talk about the characters of /The
Fountainhead/ in terms of power. Not derivative power, but real power,
the power to create -- not simply the role of directing or utilizing
others' power to create. There are six major characters in /The
Fountainhead/, each of which demonstrates a different archetypal
relationship to the creative potential of human beings.

Howard Roarke is the pure creator, independent: He has the power to
create and uses it, and does not allow that power to be directed by
anyone but his own will.

Peter Keating is a wielder of others' power. He is derivative and
dependent. He can only work with what others give, including opinions
about his own self-worth. This is emphasized by the fact that Keating
must consult with Roark each time he attempts to create a building that
is not based on someone else's plans, or on history's designs.

Guy Francon is just like Peter Keating, except that Peter was gradually
turned from being a creator to being a user. For Peter, it began when
his mother wanted him to be an architect rather than an artist; from
that point on, he lost his will to create by degrees until he had no
capacity left. For Guy, he has always accepted the role of user and
feels no attraction to any other state of being.

Ellsworth Toohey wants to make everyone dependent, so that they must
turn to him for whatever they need. He, like Roark, is also a wielder of
power, but instead of using that power to create, he focuses his energy
on removing everyone else's will to create, so that in the end they must
follow his will. This is not strictly the opposite of Roark, but it does
oppose the fact that Rand would like all humans to be like Roark --
whereas Toohey wants no one else but himself to have that power (and
thus he hates and fears Roark, since Roark's existence runs counter to
his plans).

Gail Wynand is also a creator, like Roark, who realizes that people need
his power to create -- they must feed off of him. He hates this, and in
reaction, plays on this need to punish his enemy. Roark's character does
not need to punish anyone, because Roark does not care about people's
need to use his power: he just doesn't offer it for sale. But Wynand had
sold his power to society in order to gain what he believed was the
upper hand. It is this realization which undoes him toward the end,
though Roark constantly tries to get him to see that there is no reason
to care about his past, so long as he gives up on his plan of revenge
and turns his attention to creating.

And last, Dominique Francon: She sees that people need her to create,
and she also hates this need. Her response is to not give people what
they want. By removing her power from the world, it cannot be misused.
In this way she expresses her hatred for the world by starving of it of
the very thing it needs most. Wynand believed he was causing the world
pain by misusing the needs of people, and yet this still allowed them to
survive; Dominique wants to see the world die by depriving it of what it
needs to continue. Of course, she is also depriving herself, and so
there is a kind of suicide implicit in her course of action.

Dominique knows that Roark has this power too, and that the world wants
it; and because of the world's need it will try to harness Roark
according to their desires. She tries to stop Roark because she doesn't
want to see this happen. She tries to defeat him because she loves the
power he wields so much (which is also an expression of love for
herself, because she recognizes this same power within herself). So
whatever she does to Roark, she is also doing to herself. For this
reason, the relationship between Howard and Dominique can best be
understood if they are viewed as one individual acting toward itself.

This is why Dominique wants to be dominated by Roark: because the will
to create is sublime and her heart wishes it to triumph -- even if that
means overcoming her aim of withholding that power from the world. When
Roark "takes possession of her", this is like Dominique's soul re-taking
possession of her own destiny and not letting the world's need dictate a
pattern of inaction (which has caused Dominique's life to become the
antithesis of the world -- an exact negative -- which means it still has
the very form she abhors).

Roark sees that Dominique subjugates herself to the world in this
reverse fashion and he shows her the way out: Not to care. Follow the
creative urge wherever it leads, and what the world does in response is
its own problem. When Dominique finally understands this, she is able to
stop living in terms of the world, and this is when she allows herself
to marry Roark and join him in "his world" (the world of power, rather
than the world of dependence).

At one point in the book, Dominique helps Toohey to attack Roark. This
is not because she wishes to see Roark made dependent, in the way that
Keating is dependent (which is Toohey's real plan). Rather, she wishes
Roark to understand the evil of the world, and since Toohey is actively
promoting this evil, he is its clearest and most direct representative.
If Roark sees this, she believes, he will join her in her crusade to
starve the world (which becomes the task of John Galt and company in
/Atlas Shrugged/).

Partly this cooperation with Toohey is self-defense, because by not
creating Dominique has made herself bitterly unhappy, while she sees
that Roark is doing the very things she will not allow herself to do. If
Roark can exist in the world, she can too; but if Roark cannot, then she
has been right not to try. In this way, attacking Roark can answer for
her the question of whether it is safe to develop one's power in a world
filled with people who want to take advantage of it. Roark's triumph
over Gail (which is not really a triumph over Toohey) answers this
internal question for Dominique.

How does Roark undo Gail's plan of destruction? Whereas Dominique wants
to destroy the needy world by starving it, Gail tries to destroy it by
forcing it to wallow in its own squalor. Gail does this because,
fundamentally, he makes the error of believing that everyone feels the
same way about human beings as he does. However, the world is just fine
with degrading itself, so long as Gail continues to provide them with
what they need to survive. This fact is what tires Gail to the point of
suicide, just before he meets Roark.

Since the world cannot be shown how disgusting its choices are, and
since it's only desire is to feed off the power of the creators -- no
matter how abasing that position of servitude becomes -- Gail has chosen
for himself a pointless crusade. Dominique's approach would actually
succeed (as Galt shows in /Atlas Shrugged/), although it must come at
the price of her own self -- a cost Galt avoids by banding together all
the creators in a separate society.

But since Gail cannot achieve what he seeks, and realizes his impotence
before his enemy, ultimately he does not want to live among them
anymore. But then he finds Roark, and discovers in him someone who
represents a different kind of life. This life is what Gail and
Dominique were born for. (Rand often calls this world "the world we saw
in our youth", because at that time people are unaware of the needy
structure of society). When Gail sees this vision, incarnate in an
individual (Roark), it gives him hope. He struggles with his hope, at
times defending it, at times attacking it, until he sees that his own
actions (that is, giving over his creative power to the world's desires)
has been the very reason why this perfect world does not exist for him.
This realization ruins him, depsite Roark telling him that the past does
not matter: only how we use our creative power matters.

This is what conquers Gail Wynand, in that Roark proves to him the
futility, and the wrongness, of his task. And when Dominique, too, sees
that the world does not need to be "beaten" -- because it is a
non-entity which those of power needn't consider -- she is able to join
Roark in his world and free herself of her hatred. Gail remains in his
hatred, however, because he now hates the world for what it has tricked
him into pursuing all his life. Or rather, he hates himself for having
allowed the world to draw the lines of battle.

The character of Peter Keating's girlfriend, incidentally, is a minor
one, because she simply represents another version of Keating himself:
Someone who started out innocently, but due to parents and society
convinced herself that being a user is better than being a creator,
until in the end she becomes exactly what Keating is: a hollow shell, to
be given a purpose by others who in turn seek their purpose from others
(a chain that ends in people like Toohey).

All of these themes are also to be found in /Atlas Shrugged/: where
Galt's group is similar to Roark, but uses Dominique's plan to weaken
the world and force it to grant them more freedom; and where Francisco
d'Anconia is like Roark, but using Wynand's plan to hasten the world's
destruction so that it must accede to Galt's demands; and where Dagny
Taggart is a kind of "proto-Roark" who unwittingly allows the world to
control her power because she has yet to realize that the creator need
answer only to her own desire to create.

And the reason why Galt's group still responds to the world (in /Atlas
Shrugged/) by withdrawing from it? Because of the extent to which the
lawmaker's actions have made it impossible for them to create freely. I
believe Rand took this approach because she saw litigation and the
patterns of society leading us more toward a world of dependence than
independence in the years that followed the publication of the /The
Fountainhead/. Otherwise, I think she would have focused more on Galt's
character independent of the world, rather than give the world she
despised so much a second thought. In that sense there is a strange
irony in that Roark's character would never have written a book like
/Atlas Shrugged/ -- even though it is the beauty and viability of
Roark's manner of living that Rand is trying to promote. I can only
understand this as her way of reaching out to a later generation's
youth, who had become so distanced by the mid-40s from Roark's world
that she felt it imperative to present her ideas to them in terms of
their own.
