:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       B95BF30F-69DF-4FF9-B35E-6CD1E6F97D55
:SLUG:     productivity-and-joy
:END:
---
title: Productivity and joy
tags: essays
---

All of my life people around me have focused on the "bottom line" (using
their own particular definition). I think this has become a /problem/
for those of us in the West, owing to the ways we tend to define
"effective" and "successful".

All around me, everywhere, I encounter people saddened, either by life,
or by the lack of spirit in their community, or by conditions in the
world at large. At the same time, everyone is clamoring for things to be
done: they want everything to produce a specific end result: and they
believe better structure and more resources is the answer to the
problem.

Are they? How much can we accomplish without joy and unity? The world
has countless resources, why aren't its problems solved? There are many
people showing forth extreme productivity, then why are people still
unhappy?

This is an issue I think we need to plumb to its depths, because there
exists an unspoken ambivalence with regards to flights of the spirit in
our community. I for one believe that mysticism is ultimately practical,
because only the joyful heart can attract other hearts. As `Abdu'l-Bahá
once wrote, "Who can share the Cup of Everlasting Life, who has himself
not tasted a drop?"

Some recent events, here and elsewhere -- which need not be dwelt on --
simply give voice to this undercurrent. We sometimes prevent ourselves
from engaging in the exact kind of activities which uplift and /create/
spiritual resources, because we cannot define the immediate material
products of those activities. Is this right? When we look to the end of
things, what kind of end should it be?

To me, if the people around me feel confirmed in their Faith, if they
are illumined in spirit and recommitted in their hearts, this effect
will yield fruits that themselves will yield fruit, since it creates
fertility in the mind and heart. It begets creativity, and the
willingness to persevere. Requiring numerical or demonstrable results is
what we've been doing for the last hundred years, and look where we are!
We /know/ things must change -- that we don't even begin to represent
our future World Order. Perhaps our restrictive attitude towards
unspeakable questions is one of those things that needs to change.

But this is spoken according to my own prejudices, and my own history.
This list was created so people would not feel alone, and would
ultimately become confirmed and strengthened by consorting with people
of a similar spirit. From this, they could shake off their burden of
silence, and become more exuberant toward life, and carry this over into
their work and their community. This has already happened for me. You
cannot know how much joy and happiness your responses and support have
added to my life. In a way, it has drawn from me five times the
commitment of energy that existed before, because I am now empowered by
your spiritual support and connection. In worlds unseen our souls
consort, and we whisper to each other of secrets and mysteries. Just
knowing there is a place like this where I can say such things, causes
me to sigh with joy.

What are your thoughts? I'm not asking what needs to change, because
that is the old approach. We need a new approach. Everything we've tried
before has not attracted the Kingdom. I want to know what will unlock
your soul, what will enliven you, what will engender the conditions of
true productivity and result. The genuine mystic, in my belief, can
attract the power of the Holy Spirit to such an extent -- through
prayer, devotion and labor -- that their mere presence acts as a magnet
of love and rejoicing, and everyone, spiritually, is affected for the
better. They do this by reflecting the bounties of God through an
ever-purer heart, for as Bahá'u'lláh wrote, "... a single breath from
the breezes of the Day of Thy Revelation is enough to adorn all mankind
with a fresh attire."

We must cast off the approaches of the past, which sometimes are indeed
nothing more than words designed to comfort the ego; we must also reject
old titles people would place upon us to prevent our transformation. "No
bond shall hold them back, and no counsel shall deter them."

Let us define ourselves by consulting on what our intentions are, why we
pursue the course that we do, and what our special response to the
yearly call of the House of Justice will be. Our life exists to serve
and nurture the Cause of our Beloved; how could anyone possibly impugn a
contrary motive?
