:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       3430F651-5EBA-43C1-A45B-4B6B62CD3437
:SLUG:     freedom-to-investigate-truth
:EDITED:   [2006-04-27 Thu]
:END:
#+filetags: :essays:
#+title: Freedom to investigate truth

Someone asked: /Suppose someone investigates a matter, sincerely and
honestly, to the best of her ability and with what resources are
available to her. After considering things, she forms a conclusion as
best she can. What happens if her honest investigation leads her to a
conclusion which is not in accord with what most Bahá'ís believe, or
which even seems to conflict with some statement of one of the central
figures of the Bahá'í Faith? Should she investigate the truth as best
she can, even if she reaches non-Bahá'í conclusions, or should she
renounce her investigation of the truth and take things "on faith"?/

The paradox seems to be this: If a person is granted the free right to
seek, but only if that seeking leads to one place, isn't it all a lie to
make the Faith /seem/ open, when in reality it's the same as any other
system of belief on the planet? How can one search for an assumed truth?
Isn't that like looking for something already in your hands?

Since I study and practice philosophy, this question is dear to me. I
hope I can offer something to your query.

First, I wish to distinguish the common sense usages of religious truth
and Bahá'í belief.

Bahá'í teachings describe many attributes of God, such as love, peace,
forbearance, abstinence from contention and conflict, etc. I presume
that a possession of the truth would be indicated by the presence of all
these things. Therefore, "believing" in the tenets of the Faith is not
"truth", because one can hold such beliefs and still violate all of its
principles.

In support of this, I find that `Abdu'l-Bahá said: "If religion becomes
the cause of enmity and bloodshed, then irreligion is to be preferred,
for religion is the remedy for every ailment, and if a remedy should
become the cause of ailment and difficulty, it is better to abandon it."

And Bahá'u'lláh wrote, "The purpose underlying the revelation of every
heavenly Book, nay, of every divinely-revealed verse, is to endue all
men with righteousness and understanding, so that peace and tranquillity
may be firmly established amongst them. Whatsoever instilleth assurance
into the hearts of men, whatsoever exalteth their station or promoteth
their contentment, is acceptable in the sight of God."

Again, the emphasis is on actual behavior, not profession. That is,
religion relates to an essential reality, not an outward form.

I do not believe religion's purpose is for us to have fixed ideas about
things. The stated goal is union with God, and the stages of that union
are described in the "Seven Valleys". Unless I see the signs of such a
transformation, either the person has gone nowhere or I was too blind to
notice.

"Holding Bahá'í beliefs" can even be a stumbling block to progress in
some cases, because it can lead to an arrogant assumption of superior
knowledge. "We're the most recent Faith, and you aren't." This is not
knowledge, but a bolstering of self by illusions of righteousness. It
should not be confused with the Faith, since it is distinctly /abhorred/
by it:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Verily I say unto thee: Of all men the most negligent is he that
disputeth idly and seeketh to advance himself over his brother. Say, O
brethren! Let deeds, not words, be your adorning.

#+END_QUOTE

Second, considering the idea of an undirected, pure search, where the
/only/ goal is a deeper understanding of reality.

There is a verse in the Qur'án which says:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Whoso maketh efforts for Us, in our ways will we guide him.

#+END_QUOTE

Also, Bahá'u'lláh in one place quotes an Arab proverb which says, "He
who seeketh out a thing with zeal shall find it."

It seems to me from these, and other sources, that sincere effort will
produce results, no matter the direction, since purity of the effort
attracts God's aid. "At every step, aid from the invisible realm will
attend him, and the heat of his search for grow." So the question here
is: What is her motive, and what is she really seeking? Bahá'ís or not,
people who employ religion for a sense of security are totally missing
the boat. Do they really think the journey ends with acceptance? The
Qur'án says: "Do men think when they say `We believe' they shall be let
alone and not be put to proof?"

Third, the Writings state that freedom of spirit is integral to
understanding religious truth, and not the outward assumption of a set
of beliefs -- and that such a spirit, if it love God, will transform in
its journey toward Him. It is the spirit of religion which is
significant, not its dogma. And this is attained not through assumption,
but purity, chastity, freedom and effort:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
The understanding of His words and the comprehension of the utterances
of the Birds of Heaven are in no wise dependent upon human learning.
They depend solely upon purity of heart, chastity of soul, and freedom
of spirit.

#+END_QUOTE

Fourth, I see the "Bahá'í Faith" not as the truth per se, but a portal
leading to truth. Bahá'u'lláh even states that what has been revealed to
Us is according to our capacity (i.e., related to Us), not a full
expression of His reality:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
By My spirit and by My favor! By My mercy and by My beauty! All that I
have revealed unto thee with the tongue of power, and have written for
thee with the pen of might, hath been in accordance with thy capacity
and understanding, not with My state and the melody of My voice.

#+END_QUOTE

So the Faith may spring from the source of Truth, but ten thousand years
from now, will not our forbears be amused at our ignorance? For us, the
Word of God is truth unalloyed (relative to our state); but even if we
repeat the words, we have done nothing but exercise our vocal chords. To
experience the truth contained in those words, we must immerse ourselves
in that ocean:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Immerse yourselves in the ocean of My words, that ye may unravel its
secrets, and discover all the pearls of wisdom that lie hid in its
depths. Take heed that ye do not vacillate in your determination to
embrace the truth of this Cause -- a Cause through which the
potentialities of the might of God have been revealed, and His
sovereignty established. With faces beaming with joy, hasten ye unto
Him. This is the changeless Faith of God, eternal in the past, eternal
in the future. Let him that seeketh, attain it; and as to him that hath
refused to seek it -- verily, God is Self-Sufficient, above any need of
His creatures.

#+END_QUOTE

Do you see the difference? Someone can say to me, =E= is =mc2=, and I
can nod back at him and say, "Yes, I heard you just fine." But a /world
of difference/ exists between those who merely hear, and those who
understand. To go into the problem, to root out its implications, to
nestle it within your heart, and mix its ingredients with the essence of
your own being... THAT is seeking after truth. Anything else is pale
mimicry.

Lastly, if your friend seeks after truth earnestly, I believe she will
find it. I do not know what it will look like, and I must say I'd be
surprised if she found it without ever considering -- even indirectly --
the revolutionary ideas found in the teachings of Bahá'u'lláh. Who
before Him suggested that all Faiths had one source, that science is the
supporter of religion, that the mind is the mightiest pillar supporting
the Faith of God, that women and men and all the races are equal in
their spiritual reality, that evil is but an illusion before the reality
of good, and that all souls continue to develop eternally in their quest
for God? Where else are all the Faiths described as intrinsically united
in their purpose, and what else delves into the idea of unity with such
depth and completeness? I wonder if what she finds will be the product
of a True Mind, and not simply the elaborations of a fellow seeker.

At some point, possibly, her outward behaviors and beliefs may come to
coincide with the members of our Faith. But we are not all equal in the
status of our search; every human is unique in his condition. To say
that seeking will result in following a mold, is like saying that God's
purpose in making people with free-will, was only to transform them into
automatons.

In conclusion, I think "truth" is essentially something people do not,
and will never, know, because there is infinitely much that is unknown,
and truth includes all. Hence the notion of eternal progress and
discovery.

It may be "true" that Bahá'u'lláh is a Messenger of God, and that His
words contain the wisdom needed by humanity at this stage of its
spiritual evolution. But we are not seeking after "true things". If we
were, learning that 2+2 is 4 should make us satisfied. To truly seek is
to go where no one else has gone, because how can another person's
experience of life be identical to yours?

I suppose the ultimate dilemma we still come to is: Will her search
necessarily lead her to the Bahá'í Faith?

I guess it will or it won't. In fact, that would be a pretty good test
of its truth, wouldn't it?
