:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       89D14D4A-44AE-4D42-B25F-F46785EDF23A
:SLUG:     a-house-divided
:END:
#+filetags: :journal:
#+title: A house divided

Why is following certain standards so hard? Why can we not "whip
ourselves into shape"? Why do some behaviors feel impossibly hard to
stop, with self-deception always making think we've succeeded, only to
prove later than we still fail?

I think having standards can be an excellent thing, especially if chosen
by wiser people who traveled more of the roads of life than we have.
This is purportedly the reason for the Messengers of God sending us
moral guidelines to live by: Every pupil needs a teacher.

I think self-conflict comes from not wanting to follow those standards
-- which is only natural until we understand them -- but instead of
asking ourselves what we do want, we ignore what we want. We carry on as
if we wanted something else that we don't. This doesn't eliminate the
desire, it only hides it. And once that hiding takes place, we become a
being at cross-purposes with itself. Hence, self-deception -- a way for
other wishes to pursue their ends, despite what we professedly desire.

For the pupil to respect the teacher, he must want to learn what's being
taught. Imagine you had two brothers, and one of them wanted to play
while the other wanted to study. Would there ever be effective
cooperation between them? Not unless they desire the same thing can they
really soar. For this to happen, they must respect each other, talk
openly, and come to understand what the other wants most. There must be
love, openness, and frank consultation.

Between ourselves and our bodies, our past, our ideals, we can become
divided like those two brothers, where one wants what "should be" and
the other wants something else. Will it ever work if the one simply
tries to dominate the other? Can pure love arise from a being whose
behavior is forged by such little hatreds?

The inward battle is the first that must be healed, using the same
methods needed for larger battles: openness, listening, understanding,
mutual respect, love, acceptance. If we treat ourselves unreservedly
with these qualities, we'll find it natural to treat others that way as
well.

Many of our desires are not good for us at all. Society has fed us false
messages for so long -- and they caught our attention. We want to know
if some of these promises are true, even if we've "know" they aren't. We
want to /know/ the truth, not just hear about it. This is exactly how
children are (which is really what we are), where suppression of such
knowledge often leads to just wanting it all the more.

In an atmosphere of real learning, there is no need for deception. After
all, what does deception hope to gain? After all, doesn't every part of
us simply want what is recognizes as its personal "best"? And if every
part held a certain best in common, wouldn't all of us, in harmony, seek
it? The tongue may want harmful foods, but were a delicious and health
food found, wouldn't all of us rejoice in the experience of it? Why
force things that taste terrible upon ourselves, in the name of a health
our tastes reject? Why does this happen?

My own take is that, fundamentally, there is self-hatred. We don't want
complete harmony -- which means respecting our lower nature -- but we
take pleasure in feeling dominant over all our wayward parts. It's not
an "I want to kill you" hatred, but an "I wish you were someone else"
hatred. The kind of hatred that ruins any friendship. Can we pursue
Teachings of love in such an atmosphere? If we want to love, this hatred
must be the first to go. Let's throw a homecoming party for ourselves,
and welcome back every part we had rejected, so that all can sit down
and discover a commonly wished-for goal. We have to make every part
happy for sadness to stop creeping up behind our backs. Within God's
infinite creation, I have faith that such solutions exist. There must
other reasons why we do not seek them, or find them.

A house divided pursues each a separate goal, and sabotages constantly
the efforts of the rest. Constantly at war, we are always exhausted.
Even after a single day, rather than being uplifted by radiant joy --
and thus wishing some activity to engage us -- we are utterly spent.
Television, mindlessness and sleep are our comforts. To a being united
in its purpose, however, even if that purpose are not yet "perfect" (we
are always learning), such a being will always have energy, time, and
the willingness to listen to every part of himself, in order to find the
common solution. Isn't this what is needed for the peace of mankind? So
perhaps, too, for the peace of each man.

Hating our slowness, our pettiness, our lack of fulfilling the moral
ideals, we start a campaign of self-destruction. We think of it as
self-perfection -- in terms of the self we hope to become -- but truly
it is self-destruction, the ruination of the self that we are. We deny
our wayward desires, our stray thoughts, our stupidity and naivete. We
chastise ourselves for our mistakes; we wreak emotional torment if
things go wrong. In this climate of utter unacceptance, we do not really
change who we are, we just force a part of ourselves into hiding.

By hiding away our "bad" parts, we create the illusion of success in
terms of our moral goals. It is quite satisfying to believe we're making
progress toward perfection. So satisfying, in fact, that to imagine it's
all illusion is too much to contemplate. Since actual change can be so
terribly slow -- years, decades -- it is far more effective, emotionally
speaking, to just sweep a few things under the carpet and hope no one is
the wiser. Not even ourselves!

But the self, though liable to fracture, is not so easily destroyed.
What is hidden is less visible, but no less powerful. In fact, it
associates itself with all the other childish energies we've reigned in
and deny, leading to a kind of shadow. Because this darker side receives
so little positive attention, it is less developed than other parts of
our nature. When denied what it wants, it reacts in ways that are not
very effective, and often childish. Like rebelling, or simply refusing
to cooperate until its needs are met -- without being told how to
accomplish it.

In this situation of a house divided, the self longs to be whole,
simple, complete. The soul's natural wish is for an elegant purity that
derives from a single conception. When our better half seeks this, it
can do so by two means: Integrate; or attempt to cast off the broken
parts. When we reject parts of our selves, we destroy inner simplicity,
by creating divisions along the lines of our ideas. Knowing this discord
exists, we try to resolve it by further empowering our "better" side
against the part we wish to reject. Hence all the self-help literature,
arming us for this inward battle, always promises bigger and better
techniques to force ourselves into line.

I think this is a battle which cannot be won, since to win it finally is
to destroy the very one who pursues it. It is like fighting in a
marriage, or a family, where victory is no more than a Pyrrhic loss.
Consider that we are married to our own lower nature for life; how,
then, to resolve the agitation and the cross-purposes? How would we do
it in marriage?

Love in the only answer I've found, a love that wants the happiness of
all sides, that seeks the joy of the parties involved. This is partly
why I advocate seeking joy over seeking progress: Because the goal of
progress condemns us, whereas the goal of joy offers salvation to our
longing parts. We might even find, at the end of it all, that we have no
"parts" anymore, that the fissures can be healed. Isn't that the road to
peace? Isn't a radiant joy from all parties the true sign of victory? If
this is a marriage, can anything be called a success unless both are
happy?
