:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       BB0AE3FF-67A4-4AA1-80B6-17EAEF511E9C
:SLUG:     krishnamurti-and-religion
:END:
#+filetags: :essays:
#+title: Krishnamurti and "religion"

Concerning the philosophy of Krishnamurti, reviewed from one Bahá'í's
point of view: Any "path" must be a conceived thing, because it directs
one toward something by directing them away from something else. These
two points must be held in the mind for a person to distingush what is
one from the other.

However, while moral teachings are an excellent guide to what behaviors
will help clarity, they do not grant experience. No religion is the end
it teaches. I believe this is what Krishnamurti was getting at when he
said, "Truth cannot be approached by religion". Such an approach would
be like saying that by reading the Íqán a hundred times you will
comprehend Bahá'u'lláh's station. Instead, it is not "religion" that
gets you there, but US, our lives, our experiences and interactions with
the present. These interactions are guided by religion, but religion
does not yield the substance of the interaction itself. If we try to
substitute one for the other, this is when "religion" is born in the
mind.

The point here is that purity and awareness are far more valuable to the
seeker than knowledge or devotion. The Valley of Search, the Íqán, Gems
of the Divine Mysteries, all repeatedly -- over and over -- stress the
importance of clearing away obscuring dust from the heart: all
attachments, all love and hate, all knowledge and understanding. At one
point in the Íqán, Bahá'u'lláh reports a divine saying that one must
know at least 20 sciences to understand the mystery of the
Mi=ráj; at which point He says that not only will this knowledge not help the seeker, but if he happened to possess it, that more than anything else would be the cause of his never understanding the Mi=ráj!

The individual must purge all knowledge from his heart -- "religion"
being a form of this knowledge -- and not accumulate it. Knowledge must
be relegated to its role of helping us function in life, and taken off
its pedestal of determining how we look at life itself. You could say
that religion is a functional thing, not an endpoint; it can help us,
morally, to "unaccumulate", but can cause the very harm it seeks to undo
if we "accumulate" its own teachings.

Which is, fundamentally, the exact message of Krishnamurti. When he
talks about "religion", he means the entity created in people's minds
after they come in contact with new teachings. The mind, seeking
something, finds accents of that something in a new Message; and so the
mind fills itself with this message, its dogma, its forms, its beliefs
-- until the mind is so full it can barely hold another thought. And in
that state, it will have so far removed itself from the purpose of the
Message as to be tragic.

Interestingly, Bahá'ís understand this instinctively when they talk
about Christians, or Muslims, or Jews. But they often miss the point
when talking about their own beliefs. Haven't you heard people say, "A
true Christian would leave his church and become a Bahá'í"? Well, a true
Bahá'í would leave his ideas and become a human being.

For the Writings themselves, while advocating study for the purpose of
advancing this world, reiterate ad nauseum that a deep, fundamental
purity is the only hope mankind has of perceiving the faint glimmerings
of Spirit that reflect in the heart of every created thing. From lack of
this vision, men treat each other worse than animals, and fail to
understand their common brotherhood. The failure to achieve world peace
is not due to lack of means, or plans, or hopes -- but is intrinsically
a spiritual problem caused by "religion" (not religion). That is,
because each person has his "religion" and clings to it like a God, even
two Bahá'ís may be seen to argue with one another -- despite the fact
that conflict and contention are so sternly and categorically forbidden
by their Faith!!!

When there is a clear perception of reality, there is no need for
beliefs about reality. The soul who sees clearly, whose vision is freed
from impediment, has no need of religion. Instead, he applies his deeds
and decisions to the Law, and is thus informed of Truth. He is religious
by his movement, his spirit, his breath. There is no more conflict
between what he is, and what he thinks he should be. He serves men
because it is a joyous thing to serve -- not because he must. Here
religious means "free, real, human", and religion: an education toward
this state. But "religion" is a belief that the map /is/ the territory,
the teachings /are/ the reality, the practice /is/ the experience, and
so on.

As a physicist recognizes the purpose of natural law, he will cease to
contend with those laws, and start working with them; so too religion
aims at establishing that kind of spirituality in which what is
spiritual is the only way to live. Because indeed, if Bahá'u'lláh speaks
truly, that is the "real world", and the fiction we afflict ourselves
with is due to a long-running denial of that world. In a sense, you
could say religion is like a band-aid, or a cure, specifically tailored
to a very ill patient. Should a patient revere the cure, or deplore his
illness? But a wise patient will use the cure until he is well, and then
be rid of it.

At that point -- when "religion" has been stripped away as the last
impediment -- what is seen goes beyond description. This is the stage at
which people act spontaneously for the Good because it is their highest
love. What is it that stands between people and such a perception? It is
their beliefs about reality, as opposed to true reality. To put it
coyly, true religion is that "unknowledge" which makes direct knowing
possible; it undoes the self, that man may discover his being. But if
misapplied, it too quickly enmires its adherents until they go to war
for the sake of perserving their beliefs about ending war.

Does this make the point any clearer? The "religion" Krishnamurti saw as
clinging to the souls of men is the "religion" they have piled on top of
who they truly are, and which they use as a defense against knowing what
they are: good or evil, mediocre or excellent. But the real intent of it
all is freedom -- true, genuine freedom -- and this does not happen just
because a person binds themselves to a different set of beliefs or
ideas.

To have this true religion, one must do everything that Krishnamurti
asks of us, which is the same as what Bahá'u'lláh, and the Buddha, and
everyone else back to the Oracle at Delphi: Know thyself. "He who hath
known himself hath known God." Since knowing one's self is the most
painful, most difficult process possible, it all begins with purifying
the eye, the ear, the heart, and the mind. The practices of the Bahá'í
Faith are designed to this end, and God will assist us if we use them
accordingly; but since humans are allowed to be human, encrustation is
always possible -- and this is what Krishnamurti deplored so much in the
world around him: He saw human beings shrinking from reality in
preference to a set of beliefs, and he wanted to free them from that.
*It isn't what you believe that matters, it's what you are and do!*
Isn't this same message echoed by Bahá'u'lláh? "Amongst the people is he
who seateth himself amid the sandals by the door whilst coveting in his
heart the seat of honour. Say: What manner of man art thou, O vain and
heedless one, who wouldst appear as other than thou art?"

So I think you will find that the philosophy of Krishnamurti is about
understanding who and what you are, and that this knowledge alone will
connect you to God and life. But until such understanding has taken
place, "religion" -- in the form of ideas and dutiful practices -- will
remain your greatest barrier to Truth.
