:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       87E01EAE-C5AF-4586-BD78-11B6A6D741D8
:SLUG:     translating-thought-into-language
:END:
#+filetags: :essays:
#+title: Translating thought into language

The essence of one's thought is a very hard thing to describe. And even
though we often think to ourselves in terms of words, there is something
nebulous and remote which exists before the words appear. Perhaps it is
an inclination of the soul, or what some describe as "intent", but by
casting that essence into words we make it concrete.

The nature of this essential thought is highly complex, indicating that
something is probably lost when we force it into a few simple words.
Usually it suffices for us when we think with these words, because we
are also aware of the subtle context surrounding the choice of those
words. What "anger" means to two people can greatly differ, But we have
no trouble using "anger" when thinking to ourselves, because we know
exactly what we mean.

Some words have a common definition, such as "horse" or "table". Other
words usually require clarification in order to avoid misunderstandings.
The degree of clarification needed is somehow related to the complexity
of the original thought which prompted the choice of that word.

The role of this "clarification" can be viewed as follows: In the field
of our minds, imagine that a certain tree is growing. This tree provides
us with fruit, shade, and many other wonderful things.

One day a friend notices how happy we are, and they wonder why. We tell
them about the tree, and decide they should have one of their own. But
because a tree is a very difficult thing to uproot (and sometimes kills
the tree), we have to give them a tiny little seed, which they can plant
themselves.

The seed is not the tree, but in another way it is. If the person treats
it well, it will grow up similar to (but not exactly the same as) the
original. The smallness of the seed and its apparent uselessness --
there's no shade or fruit whatsoever -- represents the difference
between the subtlety of our thoughts, and the words we use to
communicate. The "context" spoken of before is the care and feeding that
the seed requires in order to grow properly.

What is happening is that the first person is taking a very complex
things, call it /meaning/, and he is encapsulating that meaning into
something portable. That portable something, the seed, requires a few
other things in order for a second tree to be created.

In a similar way, the essence of our thoughts is captured in words, but
these words mean nothing without a common understanding of: (1) a basic
definition of the word, (2) the specific "slant" I intend for the word
to have, and (3) why I'm saying the word at all.

If the other person can understand these three things, then a second
essence, very much like our own (thought not exactly the same), will
appear in their mind.

This basically describes what happens when we "parse" the words of
another person. They are spewing basic units of information at us
(words), which have a common basic definition (that is, they have a
lexical form, or a basic representation which we can understand simply
from knowing the same language). These lexical forms combine in certain
patterns to convey a specific intent. Telling someone, "Your house is on
fire!" says something very different from "Is your house on fire?" The
lexical units, or lexemes, are the same (Is, house, fire, your, on), but
the combinations imply a different meaning. Also, only certain
combination are "legal". What determines legality is something called
syntax. Syntax specifies how lexemes can be sequenced. Syntax also
indicates that certain sequences have a specific meaning: placing "your"
in front of "house" means that the house belongs to you. But "house
your" is not legal syntax.

This notion of meaning is called semantics. Several syntaxes can express
the same semantic intent. "Your house", "Sein Haus", "Su casa", all say
the exactly the same thing. In fact, they even have the same syntax; it
is the lexemes which differ. However, each syntax defines it legal
lexemes, making these three sentences part of three different syntaxes,
or grammars. Normally we refer to English and German as languages, but
we could also refer to them as grammars, which imply a single syntax
having a unique lexical dictionary.

The same syntax can also have different semantics. This difference is
usually determined by the context of the expression, such as whether "Su
casa" means "his house" or "your house". It depends on the subject.

It is the job of a translator to take a sentence from one syntax, and
re-express that sentence using a different syntax, but without changing
the semantics. Translating "Mien Haus" to "My house", does the job
faithfully without changing the meaning at all. When two computer
languages are involved, and the second language is some kind of machine
kind, we call the program a compiler.

A compiler works in much the same way as two people who are having a
conversation. To an outside observer, nothing is really passing between
the two individuals but sound waves. The sound waves are fluid, having
high points, low points, and strange fluctuations.

The hearer in the conversation first chops these sounds into units. He
takes in each unit, in relation to the one before, and builds up
sentences. As the sentences are growing, their meaning is formed until
the hearer understands what the other person was saying. But
understanding cannot happen at the level of words, it happens in units
of own. Sometimes these units very small, such as sentences, and
sometimes they are very large. There is actually a gradation of size,
starting with a single unit to encompass the entire conversation, and
then each theme in the conversation, and further to each point within
the theme.

A computer language communicates in units which parallel these in many
ways. A program is made up of routines, along with statements which
express relationships among routines and data.
