:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       C25FF038-8803-428F-BBA7-7A49BF7AA46F
:SLUG:     black-and-white
:END:
#+filetags: :essays:
#+title: Black and white

People say that life is not black and white, but is made up of varying
shades of gray. If we imagine that between black and white there is a
line dividing the two, perhaps "gray" is just our drawing that line in a
different place than Truth does. If what we call white is really black,
or black, white, the two overlapped appear gray.

Grayness is then a consequence of incomplete knowledge. In terms of the
absolute, perhaps everything is clearly separated between good and evil,
though to our eyes, or the eyes of others, understanding that difference
can often be difficult.

This does not invalidate morality, however. Some believe that "grayness"
over-reaches the apparent simplicity of any moral code; that the
complexities of real life makes morality a thing of church and
children's schools. But the proper course is to take a humble stance,
and never cease trying to comprehend where the line may actually lie.
Each step we take clarifies, but does not solve, the problem of
incomplete knowledge.

Since each person draws their line in a different place, not only does
there exist a gray area between ourselves and Truth, but also between
each person in the world. This lesser grayness has a different size and
shape between every two people, according to how much the individuals
differ in their understanding of right and wrong.

From this it is easy to understand why the world appears complex. If
everyone took their "black and white", and overlaid it upon everyone
else's, and then placed this against the backdrop of Truth, there would
be such an amazing gradation of hue that every shade of gray is
represented.

Does such a gradation imply that Truth is imperfect? If we understood
life, we could adjust our line appropriately, but as it is we base what
we know on our schooling, our family, our beliefs, etc.

When we match our image of black and white against another person's, we
see that there will appear a zone of gray. Intolerance begins when we
accuse the other person for the existence of this grayness. Since we
feel right in our beliefs, we assume it is their fault that grayness has
crept into the picture. And they, for their part, think the same of us,
which leads ultimately to argument and misunderstanding.

With respect to one another it is useless to ask who is responsible for
the gray areas. The only constructive inquiry is to compare ourselves
with the True image, and discover how to correct our own understanding.
If everyone does this, naturally we will reach agreement some day.

Until that time the existence of grayness should indicate that there is
much yet to be learned from life. None of us knows how close he is to a
full understanding of Truth. Not until the day all grayness has finally
vanished.
