:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       758B5241-E001-468F-8D5B-62428FAD4155
:SLUG:     the-distorting-effects-of-time
:END:
---
title: The distorting effects of time
tags: essays
---

Time can play funny tricks when we look at the world. Seen today, it is
true that there are many faiths, and they all profess ultimately the
same goal. In fact, as I look at things through the eye of "now", I
think Bahá'ís have just added one more piece to an already overly
complicated puzzle.

As I dilate my view, however, and comprehend the entire span, I see that
there are not several faiths, but a progression marching steadily
through history.

The appearance of "many" today is the result of past rejection. If all
of these faiths -- any of them -- are true, there would be fewer now. If
Muhammad were true, the Christians should have accepted Him when they
encountered the Muslims. Already that would have made the world simpler
today. If Christ were true, the Jews would have acknowledged Him. If
Buddha were true, the Hindus surrounding Him would have listened more
closely, etc.

Bahá'u'lláh says, "This is the changeless Faith of God, eternal in the
past, eternal in the future". Our mistakes are what fracture truth, just
as Muhammad said, "Knowledge is a single point, but the ignorant have
multiplied it". When I look at the world and see so much contention of
belief, I realize I am not looking at Divine truth, but instead I'm
seeing the nature of our own psyche at this time: divided, separated,
clinging to past ways and patterns.

As we grow toward inner health, isn't it natural we will come to
recognize one truth? "Bahá'í" is not the name of this truth; as Lao-Tzu
wrote, "The name which can be named is not the Eternal Name." We are
always, always midwives of a future truth, endlessly unfolding in pace
with man's ability to comprehend. This is true of my own education; I
think it's also true of the world at large.

The question is, are Bahá'u'lláh's writings what we need to continue our
progression? I don't think humankind has plumbed the depths of its
spiritual potential -- no matter the actual nearness of God -- nor is
such development by any means universal. Watching the evening news
proves this to me every time. Where is the plan, the path, the means for
this to happen?

Acceptance works well on an individual basis, but alone it cannot lead
to education. If I had a room full of children under my care, would
leaving them alone to choose their own way ever lead to unity and mutual
understanding, or inner growth? Instead, lack of guidance would cause
whatever is strongest in their character to become dominant.

The world's people are at varying stages of growth; they need a parent,
a guardian, to oversee its needs and provide direction. It needs genuine
authority! This is what the words of God offer, for the time in which
they are revealed. And this is why Bahá'ís see a special place for
Bahá'u'lláh writings, since they are especially suited to the
requirements of world unity, and address humanity's problems on a global
scale.

And when we've finally conquered that problem -- a situation poets have
begged and longed for for thousands of years already -- our growth will
simply continue from there. Always under a different name, but always
with the same theme and spirit: unfoldment of human potential,
personally and collectively.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Likewise, reflect upon the perfection of man's creation, and that all
these planes and states are folded up and hidden away within him.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Dost thou reckon thyself only a puny form When within thee the universe
is folded?

#+END_QUOTE

Then we must labor to destroy the animal condition, till the meaning of
humanity shall come to light.

#+END_QUOTE
