:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       43B0437C-C887-475A-81C0-285484189BBA
:SLUG:     the-many-and-the-one
:END:
#+filetags: :journal:
#+title: The many and the one

Alan Watts, in his book
[[http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/0394704681/qid=1093753840/sr=8-1/ref=sr_8_xs_ap_i1_xgl14/102-6635401-8402514?v=glance&s=books&n=507846][The
Wisdom of Insecurity]], wrote:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
The sense of unity with the "All" is not... a nebulous state of mind, a
sort of trance, in which all form and distinction is abolished, as if
man and the universe merged into a luminous mist of pale mauve. Just as
process and form, energy and matter, myself and experience, are names
for, and ways of looking at, the same thing -- so one and many, unity
and multiplicity, identity and difference, are not mutually exclusive
opposites: they are each other, much as the body is its various organs.
To discover that the many are the one, and that the one is the many, is
to realize that both are words and noises representing what is at once
obvious to sense and feeling, and an enigma to logic and description.

#+END_QUOTE

Previous to reading this, I had been looking for an experience of
reality underlying all my perceptions of it. Now, I wonder if my
perceptions /are/ that reality -- if not in essence, then in being.

For example, my heart is me, in the sense that if I lost my heart, I
would perish. My life and my heart are synonymous. But my heart is not
what you read in these sentences. The personality you read is a reality
more uniquely me than any physical part. This intangible me, in one
sense, is distinct from the physical; this can lead me to see the two
selves as utterly different, sometimes at odds with each other. Yet, I
have never had an experience of life other than a bodily one, which
means that my body is as much me as my soul -- at this point in my
experience of life. The two depend on each other. This creates a unity
from the two, which is what people think of as "John". Since no one can
see my soul, that is not "John"; and if my body were laid under the
ground, that also would not be me. My reality is neither one, but the
unity of the whole. The many are the one.

It might be said that what is most real is what can endure death. In the
scheme of my separate parts, this is certainly true. But the part of me
that does survive cannot become what it will without the part it leaves
behind. Without this mortal, physical life, my soul would be a very
different soul. Thus, in the scheme of my /being/, there is no part more
real than another. To call the physical experience unreal would imply
that what my soul has learned here is unreal; yet if I suddenly undid
the whole experience, the being that I am -- who has learned all these
things -- would also vanish.

The ultimate reality, then, of which all my perceptions are but shades
of glimpses, /is also what I perceive of it/. Because without those
perceptions, there would be no "thing perceived". "It" might still
continue, but it would no longer be an "it", any more than a thing
unexperienced can ever be real to anyone but itself. In the scheme of
the many, what is truly real may forever outreach me; but in terms of
our unity, how I perceive it is very much a part of what it is.

For example: everyone reads a poem differently. There is the author's
intent, which no one can truly understand but him; and there are all the
opinions people have of that poem. It could be said the author's intent
is more real, because his intention is what created the poem. Without
him, there would be nothing to read. Other people's views did not bring
the poem into being. But are they less real? In the sense of unity,
those opinions are also the reality of the poem. It is both what the
author intended, and what other people read into it. If they never read
it, it would not be a poem. It would rather be a nameless experience
shared between the author and himself. To call it a "poem" would mean no
more than calling it by any other name. It becomes a "poem" only when
there is an audience to hear it. It's reality, then, is both in itself
-- separate from the reader and nameless -- and in the reader, in the
form of a synergistic whole we call "a poem".

All of this, of course, relates to our connection with the One Who
created us. In the sense of being separate, I could no more say, "I am
God", than a cell of my body could claim to bear my identity. But in the
sense of the-whole-in-the-parts, we are very much "God", for without a
creation He would not be a Creator. His essence would still endure, but
He would no longer be "He" without us. "His name, the Creator,
presupposeth a creation, even as His title, the Lord of Men, must
involve the existence of a servant."

To use another example: Every father was also a son. As a man, the
father is separate from the son, but as a father, he is linked. Without
the son, he would not be a father; without the father, there would be no
son. Father and son are thus two sides of a single being: a greater
unity made up of the two. Take either away, and both disappear. They are
each other. Separate in one sense, but of one being ("fatherhood") in
another.

So when I look up at the sun or the clouds, I am more than the eyes that
see them, or my sight of them. I am something which includes me as the
seer, and the sky as the seen. We cannot be separated without destroying
the two -- nor can we be merged. We must be distinct even as we must be
one, just as the moments of my life make up the unity of who I am,
without any moment ever being the duplicate of another. Even unity and
distinction are parts of a whole, for if there were no distinction,
there would be no unity.

All of this completely changes my view of what is "real". There is no
underneath, anymore. There might still be, in the existential sense, but
not in the experiential sense; because although I can never know the
essence of reality -- how to see without perception? -- I am always part
of it by my role in the greater unity. I am what I seek, as the son is
the reality of the father. It is not the world which makes me feel
apart, but my seeking to be united with it! It is a goal which, because
it's already met, cannot be satisfied if one doesn't believe it. It
would be like seeing a person who should be happy, but isn't. What can
you do? It's not the circumstances that need changing, but their basic
relationship to life. How /that/ happens, I think, is the next step
along this path...

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Meditate on what the poet hath written: "Wonder not, if my Best-Beloved
be closer to me than mine own self; wonder at this, that I, despite such
nearness, should still be so far from Him."...

#+END_QUOTE
