:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       72AA5BEB-7119-4556-A69E-393B2D63D60A
:SLUG:     love-is-a-veil
:END:
---
title: Love is a Veil
tags: essays
---

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Love is a veil betwixt the lover and the beloved.[fn:1]

#+END_QUOTE

When you love any object, you love it because of the presence of the
Beloved's attributes manifest within it; just as you love a letter from
a beloved one for the sake of its author. All created things refer to
God in this way; creation is the token of its Creator.

So the love we feel is the natural response of the soul to the quality
of its Cherished One as revealed by and through material reality. And
yet, because He is ever inaccessible to us, this love must always make
reference to the point of revelation; that is, it must always be known
and expressed within the framework of a limited being, however much that
love is for the sake of One Who is limitless.

Thus the nature of our love itself tends to draw us away from the One
Beloved, because that love exists due to limited things, and must exist
in reference to what is limited -- even our feeling of it is limited,
our understanding is limited, our own being was created within these
limits -- albeit the love itself is directed beyond the limited toward
the Unlimited.

For example, you receive a letter from one who is longed for. All you
have at that moment is the letter; you read it again and again,
countless times, for the sake of the one who wrote it. It is your means
of communion, your path, your point of connection. In respect to you, it
is both reunion and separation, connection and distance; it emphasizes
the presence of the author, and emphasizes her absence, at one and the
same moment; it confirms and denies reunion in a single stroke.

In respect to the writer, the beloved, it is the dawning point, the
voice, the means, the vehicle, the expression, the word, the means, the
sign. It is her way of making her love known. It is the form of the tie,
the life of the bond. In respect to itself, it is not worthy of mention;
ink and paper alone have never deserved love.

In respect to the life, it is both means and barrier. It is the channel,
but not the flow; the form, but not the substance; the manifestation,
but not the essence.

Between the believer and God, love itself is like the letter. For love
is one of the created attributes of God, knowable by its signs in the
world of man. Love is enumerated among the several virtues which
consciousness may experience. And so love itself is a means by which we
gain access to God through the revelation of His attributes in the
expression of love. And yet God Himself is exalted beyond love itself.
Even love proclaims its lifelessness and unworthiness compared to God
Himself. It is only a created reality, at the service of believer's
approach to his Creator, but in no way the goal, or an adequate
substitute for the goal. God is beyond all things, all knowledge --
inapproachable. Love alone, as with the other attributes of God, permit
union between what is exalted beyond any concept of union, and the
believer whose limitations require the idea of "union" in order to end
the fire of "separation".

Such that love itself, in its own being, is glorified by the role that
it plays, and bemoans that it, too, must hold the believer apart from
true union, in the sense of absolute oneness between what is finite with
what is beyond even infinity. The painting must stand between you and
Beauty, however much it is your means and access to Beauty; however much
you could not know Beauty without it; however much its meaning and glory
and purpose are its relationship to Beauty; yet, by its very presence,
it declares that you and Beauty are still separate, owing to your need
of a medium. The painting declares, "You are not yet one with Beauty,
for you look to me to see Beauty, though I am not Beauty." So with love,
we love the creator, yet require that love to have the experience of
loving. We cannot gain access -- while cherishing love -- beyond that
love, nor reach the Source behind that love, no more than we could see
without sight, or know without knowing, or experience presence in
absence. The attributes separate us from what is attributed, as the
phenomena debar us from the noumenon.

Beyond this is a mystical station in which the medium altogether
disappears, as described by Bah치'u'll치h:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
... the denizens of the undying city, who dwell in the green garden
land, see not even "neither first nor last"; they fly from all that is
first, and repulse all that is last. For these have passed over the
worlds of names, and fled beyond the worlds of attributes as swift as
lightning. Thus is it said: "Absolute Unity excludeth all attributes."
And they have made their dwelling-place in the shadow of the
Essence.[fn:2]

#+END_QUOTE

These are a people who consort with the Author of love, of beauty, of
all quality perceptible to life. They see love in terms of what makes
love lovable, and beauty as to what makes beauty beautiful; and since
these two are the same thing, beauty and love disappears and are
replaced by Him. Love is left behind; only He remains. Life is no longer
experienced, but God is the sole experience. Love as love was "a veil
betwixt the lover and the loved one"; now it is Him, and has ceased to
be nameable as its own reality. You ask such a man, "What is this? What
is that?" And he might say, "What is 'this', what is 'that'?"

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
... those personages who in a single step have passed over the world of
the relative and the limited, and dwelt on the fair plane of the
Absolute, and pitched their tent in the worlds of authority and command
-- have burned away these relativities with a single spark, and blotted
out these words with a drop of dew. And they swim in the sea of the
spirit, and soar in the holy air of light. Then what life have words, on
such a plane, that "first" and "last" or other than these be seen or
mentioned! In this realm, the first is the last itself, and the last is
but the first.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
In thy soul of love build thou a fire And burn all thoughts and words
entire.[fn:3]

#+END_QUOTE

#+END_QUOTE

One does not even say here that such and such a thing is beautiful
because it reflects the Beauty of God; there is no "thing" apart from
God to be named; there is no "beauty" to be described; there is no
distinction of high from low, left from right. God is God in the mode of
God -- even though this itself is limited by its being reference to what
is unreferenceable. "... the wayfarer leaveth behind him the stages of
the 'oneness of Being and Manifestation' and reacheth a oneness that is
sanctified above these two stations." That is, if the beauty of a thing
is due to the light of God within it, this still implies that something
apart from God is revealing a light that originated from an unseen point
outside itself; this still creates a veil between the Source and the
believer, by asserting the existence of an intermediary -- who is, by
the nature of the description, not God. Yet if nothing is which is not
Him ("There was God and there was naught beside Him."), then what is
meant by "intermediary"? One does not say that the being of beauty and
the manifestation of being related to the same Source, without implying
a division within this Source between its being and its manifestation.
When even this veil is burnt away, then even the intermediary ceases to
have being as an intermediary, which would imply a separate being from
the Being that is its being. And thus:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
In this city, even the veils of light are split asunder and vanish away.
"His beauty hath no veiling save light, His face no covering save
revelation."[fn:4]

#+END_QUOTE

All veils, even that veil by which Beauty was known as "beautiful" by
its beauty in the world, are rent, and the believer himself is rescued
from his belief. At this point there is no story to tell, for such would
imply a telling, which there cannot be as itself. And yet, a telling
there is, and a sign, a beauty, a love -- even though they do not exist,
and it is absurdity to speak as if they did. It is not that the sign is
rubbed out from view, for then it would still exist even if invisibly;
it is that what was known as "sign" is utterly gone; even sign and
signified are beyond a claim of oneness, and one cannot understand why
there are words used to talk of such a thing as "sign" and "signified".
What are these, when only God is?

It impossible to discuss the matter in a language that constantly
establishes its points by distinguishes one truth from another. Talk of
unity discards plurality, while plurality continues undisturbed. If you
have a hundred love letters, and say that in fact there is only one
letter, you speak truth and confusion in the same moment. There are one
hundred, and there is one; each statement denies the other, while both
are true. There is no way around this aspect of language, since clarity
is achieved at the cost of obscurity. It must be left, then, to
experience; hearts which understand will know it by other means, and
perhaps speaking on these matters only happens because not speaking was,
for a moment, simply less desirable.

[fn:1] Quoted by Bah치'u'll치h in the Seven Valleys

[fn:2] From the Seven Valleys

[fn:3] ibid

[fn:4] ibid
