:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       6CD47ED9-1609-448F-8923-E7AFB183FED3
:SLUG:     driving-and-the-self
:END:
#+filetags: :journal:
#+title: Driving and the self

If "self" is our conscious will -- which determines our experience of
reality -- I count two aspects to exercising this will: how well we pay
attention, and what we pay attention to. If self has a condition of
fulfillment, it lies in the perfection of these two things, just as the
fulfillment of anything is measured by how well we use it, and what we
use it for.

Take driving, for example. At its best, it takes us from one place to
another in speed and comfort. To do this, the driver must learn how to
use the car, and spend time and effort practicing its use. In the early
stages, because of unfamiliarity, he spends at least as much attention
on the car itself, as he does to the road. This division of focus hurts
his ability to drive, but is a necessary part of learning. So although
the goal of driving relates to the world outside the car, much of his
initial attention is fixed inside, on becoming familiar with the car's
workings. It is a curious paradox, but from it comes the end result of
effortless driving.

The self[fn:1] must go through similar stages. If its function is
awareness, it is an awareness /of/. Of what, and how to use it, is the
point of education. Initially we might pay as much or more attention to
the process of awareness /per se/ as we do to what we're becoming aware
of, but when the self functions smoothly, focus moves away from the
process to its intent (not in the sense of a specific goal, but rather
like art, whose intent is the full experience of creation, and not just
the resulting artwork).

This well-functioning self experiences life in a much different way than
its earlier stages. As with driving, the beginning is fun and exciting,
but also anxious and overwhelming: the skilled driver enjoys a peace and
depth of satisfaction absent in the student. This is because his
consciousness is fully directed outside the car, while he unconsciously
operates it. In the same way, when our awareness becomes fully conscious
of its Intended One (baqá) and ceases to be conscious of itself (faná),
it will really eat up the road...

[fn:1] I do not mean "the self that acquires", but rather: When you look
       at the world, what do you see? This kind of self exists only in
       the moment, since it /is/ the act of perception. The other kind
       of "self" is a sort of fiction used to abstract our perception
       from the process of its operation.
