:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       CE7CB083-BCD1-4C99-A34F-D0B9B0773480
:SLUG:     transcending-suffering
:END:
---
title: Transcending suffering
tags: journal
---

The spiritual world "bestows only the joy"; suffering comes from this
world, and part of freeing one's self from it means escaping suffering.
However, this happens not by avoiding the particulars of a situation,
but by transmuting our experience of it.

Clarifying the relationship between joy and suffering is something I've
been trying to do a lot in my writing, but it proves an elusive task.
Maybe an analogy will help: Whenever I play a sport that I love, it
wracks my body -- but is not perceived as suffering; I want to go out
and do it again. But if I don't love the sport, it wearies both my body
and heart; and as Bahá'u'lláh wrote:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Lay not upon your souls that which will weary them and weigh them down,
but rather what will lighten and uplift them, so that they may soar on
the wings of the Divine verses towards the Dawning-place of His manifest
signs; this will draw you nearer to God, did ye but comprehend.[fn:1]

#+END_QUOTE

The experience of joy and suffering are like barometers, indicating the
nature of our relationship to life (and thus to the Beloved). If
something causes us suffering, it means we cannot see the Beloved in
that direction; whereas joy opens our eyes to the true Reality.

This is confused by the fact that one must know how to distinguish joy
from pastimes. It is the soul that feels joy, not the body. To discern
our real response to a situation requires profound honesty. Violating
chastity, for example, may feel terrific, but a true heart will see how
it sickens the soul.

Next is the fact that some suffering is ordained. This is suffering we
cannot avoid, either because life inflicts it upon us, or His law does.
In that case, what happens is a challenge to find our way through a
false understanding of life. Without such challenges, we would naturally
avoid these tests and fail to grow. For the sake of the soul's lasting
joy, our ignorance is brought forcibly to our attention.

The Fast is one of these, where the fact of suffering is like a poke in
the ribs, saying, "Why do you still experience me as suffering?" If we
understood the real nature of the Fast, we would keep it without ceasing
(see quote in previous post[fn:2]). Or as He puts it in another place:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Whatsoever He, the Well-Beloved, ordaineth, the same is, verily,
beloved. To this He Who is the Lord of all creation beareth Me witness.
Whoso hath inhaled the sweet fragrance of the All-Merciful, and
recognized the Source of this utterance, will welcome with his own eyes
the shafts of the enemy, that he may establish the truth of the laws of
God amongst men.[fn:3]

#+END_QUOTE

In a genuine religious context, physical suffering may worsen, but the
lover transmutes it in his heart into something better than ease and
comfort -- since his suffering connects him to his Beloved. `Abdu'l-Bahá
says of such a soul: "It will not see in this station anything that is
inconsistent with its contentment and it does not prefer the greatest
ease to the most mighty calamity."

Suffering is life acting in the role of a teacher. That we still see it
should spur us on to pray and meditate, reflect on what we see, question
our motives, our knowledge, our ideas, our beliefs. Suffering is a voice
on the wind saying, "See past me, for I am the veil."

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Tear asunder, O my God, the veil of vain imaginings that hath obscured
the vision of Thy people, that all may haste towards Thee, may tread the
path of Thy pleasure, and walk in the ways of Thy Faith. We are, O my
God, Thy servants and Thy bondsmen. Thou art sufficient unto us so that
we can dispense with the world and all that is therein. We are wholly
satisfied with all that hath befallen us in Thy path, and exclaim:
"Praised be Thou, in Whose hand are the realms of revelation and of
creation, and all the kingdoms of earth and heaven!"[fn:4]

#+END_QUOTE

As vision clears and the soul's perception becomes plain, following
one's joy can become a safe route along the Way -- because the soul's
happiness can come only from nearness to God. When finally we "suffer
for the Beloved's sake" but feel it as bliss, we have passed one of
life's great tests. Then suffering ends, and whatever the body undergoes
is wholly different from the life of the soul.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Although to outward view, the wayfarers in this Valley may dwell upon
the dust, yet inwardly they are throned in the heights of mystic
meaning; they eat of the endless bounties of inner significances, and
drink of the delicate wines of the spirit.[fn:5]

#+END_QUOTE

Develop a strong relationship with suffering! make it a friend; love it
no matter how hard it seems -- and in return, secrets will be whispered
in your ears...

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
We are the guests of one who devours his guests The friends of the one
who slaughters his friends... Although by his gaze he brings death to so
many lovers Let yourself be killed by him: is he not the water of life?

Never, ever, grow bitter: he is the friend and kills gently. Keep your
heart noble, for this most noble love Kills only kings near God and men
free from passion.

We are the night, earth's shadow. He is the Sun: He splits open the
night with a sword soaked in dawn...[fn:6]

#+END_QUOTE

[fn:1] Bahá'u'lláh, Kitáb-i-Aqdas, P149

[fn:2] "Should Thy Will decree that out of Thy mouth these words proceed
       and be addressed unto them, `Observe, for My Beauty's sake, the
       fast, O people, and set no limit to its duration,' I swear by the
       majesty of Thy glory, that every one of them will faithfully
       observe it, will abstain from whatsoever will violate Thy law,
       and will continue to do so until they yield up their souls unto
       Thee." -- Bahá'u'lláh, Gleanings, p.337

[fn:3] Bahá'u'lláh, Kitáb-i-Aqdas, p.22

[fn:4] Bahá'u'lláh, Prayers and Meditations, p.102

[fn:5] Bahá'u'lláh, Seven Valleys, p.30

[fn:6] Poem by Rumi.
