:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       B6C0E106-A280-4BE1-80E4-5B3C7EF557E0
:SLUG:     are-we-abhorrent-to-god
:END:
#+filetags: :essays:
#+title: Are we abhorrent to God?

[WARNING] Note with key '1' defined at line 256 column 1 but not used.
#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
Nay!  When the earth is pounded to powder,
And thy Lord cometh, and His angels, rank upon rank,

And Hell, that Day, is brought face to face --
on that Day, man will remember,
but how will that remembrance profit him?

He will say: "Ah!
Would that I had sent forth good deeds for this, my Future Life!"

For, that Day, His Chastisement will be such as none else can inflict,
And His bonds will be such as none other can bind.

Yet to the righteous soul will be said:

O thou soul who art well assured,
Return to thy Lord, well-pleased, and pleasing unto Him.

Enter thou among My servants,
And enter thou My paradise.[^1]
#+END_EXAMPLE

Many people that I know would shy away from ever attributing the end of
this quotation to themselves. And this brings up a certain point, which
I am not sure stems from scripture: that to a certain extent we believe
we are abhorrent to God, and worthy of destruction.

In the sense of pure justice, we know that the Qu'rán says, "Should God
punish men for their perverse doings, He would not leave on earth a
moving thing! But to an appointed term doth He respite them..."[fn:1]

Yet we are not held accountable to pure justice. This is evidenced by
the following:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Do Thou graciously forgive me for the things that I have wrought in Thy
holy presence, and look not upon me with the glance of justice, but
rather deliver me through Thy grace, treat me with Thy mercy and deal
with me according to Thy bountiful favours, as is worthy of Thy
glory.[fn:2]

#+END_QUOTE

If we were doomed to a full culpability for our actions, we could never
hope for grace, such as the Báb implores in the above prayer. Therefore,
since "He is in truth the Omnipotent, the All-Powerful, He Who is wont
to answer the call of men;"[fn:3] I imagine our focus should not be to
dwell on the precepts of justice, but to ask for mercy.

Consider a parent: how willing they are to overlook every fault in a
child, and to focus on and develop whatever good qualities may begin to
appear. They found all their expectations in the hope that this good
quality will develop, rather than deploring the fact of the bad. In
fact, the bad may be completely forgiving, and even written off as
childish ignorance, if only the good will prevail in adulthood.

Why is it that we cannot say to ourselves that we are "well-pleased, and
pleasing unto Him"? Perhaps we cannot know this. But doesn't this also
mean that we cannot honestly know whether or not we are /dis/pleasing?
God has not sent destruction upon us, and the events of our lives are
constantly seen as improving us and helping us to become better. Yet, if
we look down upon ourselves, or castigate our past actions, then aren't
we presuming to know the feelings of God? We have no knowledge of His
mind; at best, we should leave that subject alone.

So this underlying feeling many of us have imbibed during our upbringing
-- that we are constantly displeasing to our Creator -- seems now
ludicrous. There are several factors that I believe relate to this:

None of us acts from malice, except for an extreme few. Malice means to
commit evil, in the full knowledge of, and desire to, act against the
good. How often have we ever been cruel or hurtful, and then exulted in
the cruelty itself? When we are angry, usually this stems from a feeling
of justification, not from a lust for hatred.

We judge ourselves too harshly if we think that we are evil to that
degree. Malice is a soul-destroying thing[fn:4], and I'm not sure many
people could even tolerate it without some sort of breakdown.

So, considering that we are rarely so evil as this, it must mean that we
are to some extent ignorant when we act wrongly: we are unaware of the
significance of our actions, or what they imply. This is evidenced by
the fact that as we grow older, we often look back at our lives and
realize how foolish we had been a different points in time. The
discrepancy here is not one of goodness, but of maturity.

There is no reason to believe that we are not pleasing to our Creator;
merely the fact that we are alive, and appreciative of His gifts, must
account for something. If we go back to the analogy of the parent, just
think how pleased a parent would be if his or her child expressed their
joy at being alive. In that moment, it would not matter what they had
done, or who they had become; the mere fact of their gratitude could
inspire forgetfulness in even some of the most difficult cases. True,
the past must be reckoned with, but in the sense of that parent's
relationship to the child's /being/, rather than their behavior, we
might say that a parent's love is a hard thing to destroy -- sometimes
even in the face of malice.

Why, then, would we ever imagine that God is waiting, ready to condemn
us? All of us here on earth are like children. Whenever I read the
following biblical quotation, it makes me think that our task here on
earth is more to realize who we truly are (both individually, and as a
species), rather than to achieve some particular feat of glory:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
At the same time came the disciples unto Jesus, saying, "Who is the
greatest in the kingdom of heaven?" And Jesus called a little child unto
him, and set him in the midst of them, and said, "Verily I say unto you,
except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not
enter into the kingdom of heaven. Whosoever therefore shall humble
himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of
heaven."[fn:5]

#+END_QUOTE

Our striving is what is productive of our advancement, so that the fruit
of our labors is not solely outward conquest. Similarly, if we strive,
but do not completely fulfill the picture of a glorious result, yet it
cannot be called worthless.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Is not the object of every Revelation to effect a transformation in the
whole character of mankind, a transformation that shall manifest itself,
both outwardly and inwardly, that shall affect both its inner life and
external conditions? For if the character of mankind be not changed, the
futility of God's universal Manifestations would be apparent.[fn:6]

#+END_QUOTE

Further, it often happens that a more subtle thing, even though it may
not produce an immediate result, will effect a change in our soul which
might ultimately yield very great results. Plato writes:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
I am amused, I said, at your fear of the world, which makes you guard
against the appearance of insisting upon useless studies; and I quite
admit the difficulty of believing that in every man there is an eye of
the soul which, when by other pursuits lost and dimmed, is by these
purified and re-illumined; and is more precious far than ten thousand
bodily eyes, for by it alone is truth seen...[fn:7]

#+END_QUOTE

The reason I bring this up is to attack the idea that we should
constantly berate ourselves for not playing an active part in the world
in the way that others imagine the word "activity" to imply. No one can
judge the effects of our actions, unless he possess a truly timeless
vision[fn:8]. What appears to have an effect today may dry up and
whither away, while another thing, far more subtle and quiet, may
actually achieve the real result.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Only simple and quiet words will ripen of themselves. For a whirlwind
does not last a whole morning, nor does a sudden shower last a whole
day.

Who is their author? Heaven-and-Earth! Even Heaven-and-Earth cannot make
such violent things last long; How much truer is it of the rash
endeavors of men?[fn:9]

#+END_QUOTE

Society holds up to us a certain ideal of "success" and achievement. And
we measure ourselves by this ideal, accepting blindly what they in turn
accepted blindly, from parents who may have never questioned the meaning
of this success.

At the present day, we evaluate our activities according to the plans
and purposes of the Cause of God. Somehow, duty has lost the sense of
glory that usually accompanies it when speaking of a great cause; and
instead, it has become a burdensome thing to fill us with grief at our
own lack of accomplishment.

Though, I am not writing this to dissuade people from action. But we
must come to terms with what we feel success to be: with the fact that
we cannot rely on our own sense of God's evaluation of our success, and
that sometimes, the result of an action may be far-distanced from its
beginning. If we can escape from this destructive notion of being
hurried continually toward some external goal, perhaps we might
rediscover that part of ourselves which God loved at the time of our
creation[fn:10], and which I believe He will always love. And then,
warmed by the sunlight embrace of that realization, relaxed such that we
become as deep pools of water, which our friends must wade through to
reach us, other people -- the non-Bahá'í's -- will notice our peaceful
happiness, and will want to become a part of that life.

But if they look at us and see only a guilt-ridden community,
beleaguered at all times by our own sense of failure, and never really
reaching that station of being "well-pleased, and pleasing unto Him,"
then why in the world would they want to become part of that? To an
atheist, although that life may be unsatisifying if they focus on it
with due introspection, yet it still offers a certain freedom and
lightness of soul that would be hard to give up for a typically
"religious" life.

I think the Cause of Bahá'u'lláh, instead, presents this idea:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
In this world we are influenced by two sentiments, Joy and Pain.

Joy gives us wings! In times of joy our strength is more vital, our
intellect keener, and our understanding less clouded. We seem better
able to cope with the world and to find our sphere of usefulness. But
when sadness visits us we become weak, our strength leaves us, our
comprehension is dim and our intelligence veiled. The actualities of
life seem to elude our grasp, the eyes of our spirits fail to discover
the sacred mysteries, and we become even as dead beings.

There is no human being untouched by these two influences; but all the
sorrow and the grief that exist come from the world of matter -- the
spiritual world bestows only the joy![fn:11]

#+END_QUOTE

We only water the earth overmuch by our tears of self-grief, and make
the ground muddy and hard to navigate. Pulling up our feet wearily from
the mire, we are aware only of how tired and difficult life has become.
But if we dry these tears, and invite the sun to shine upon everything
in our lives, the terrain will once again become firm and easily
navigable. This, I believe, is the key to fulfilling our duties: not to
continue adding on to our sense of responsibility until our backs creak,
but to realize through our joy and sense of glory that the load is not
at all difficult to bear. So many things become easy through love, that
seem almost unaccomplishable without it.

The idea that we are abhorrent to God should be erased from our minds.
It makes no sense in the world of nature; I can find no correlate in
this plane of existence, nor in the language of Revelation. Instead, I
find words like these:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
O Son of Spirit! With the joyful tidings of light I hail thee: rejoice!
To the court of holiness I summon thee; abide therein that thou mayest
live in peace for evermore.

O Son of Spirit! The spirit of holiness beareth unto thee the joyful
tidings of reunion; wherefore dost thou grieve? The spirit of power
confirmeth thee in His cause; why dost thou veil thyself? The light of
His countenance doth lead thee; how canst thou go astray?[fn:12]

#+END_QUOTE

And:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Dost thou reckon thyself only a puny form When within thee the universe
is folded?

#+END_QUOTE

Then we must labor to destroy the animal condition, till the meaning of
humanity shall come to light.[fn:13]

#+END_QUOTE

And:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
If any man were to meditate on that which the Scriptures, sent down from
the heaven of God's holy Will, have revealed, he would readily recognize
that their purpose is that all men shall be regarded as one soul, so
that the seal bearing the words "The Kingdom shall be God's" may be
stamped on every heart, and the light of Divine bounty, of grace, and
mercy may envelop all mankind. The one true God, exalted be His glory,
hath wished nothing for Himself.[fn:14]

#+END_QUOTE

If the intent of this essay is unclear, allow me to restate it: at some
point along the way we seem to have developed a degrading,
self-defeating idea that we are forever unacceptable, and perhaps even
abhorrent, to God; and we wear away our lives striving for this
acceptance, but never quite feel that we reach it. But this model offers
little joy, and much anxiety; rather, we should permit our soul's
exuberance at the thought of rejoining our Creator to propel us forward.
Then, we would find the ordinary life jejune beyond degree, and would
discover ourselves naturally racing toward that far-off goal...

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
O Son of Justice! Whither can a lover go but to the land of his beloved?
and what seeker findeth rest away from his heart's desire? To the true
lover reunion is life, and separation is death. His breast is void of
patience and his heart hath no peace. A myriad lives he would forsake to
hasten to the abode of his beloved.[fn:15]

#+END_QUOTE

[fn:1] Qu'rán, 16:63

[fn:2] Báb, Selections from the Writings of the Báb, p.208

[fn:3] Tablets of Bahá'u'lláh, p. 29

[fn:4] cf. `Abdu'l-Bahá, Some Answered Questions, pp. 127-128

[fn:5] Bible, Matthew, 18:1-4

[fn:6] The World Order of Bahá'u'lláh, p. 25

[fn:7] Plato, The Republic, Book VII

[fn:8] cf. Bahá'u'lláh, The Seven Valleys, p. 16

[fn:9] Lao-Tse, Tao The Ching

[fn:10] cf. The Hidden Words of Bahá'u'lláh, p. 4

[fn:11] `Abdu'l-Bahá, Paris Talks, pp. 109-110

[fn:12] The Hidden Words of Bahá'u'lláh, pp. 11-12

[fn:13] Bahá'u'lláh, The Seven Valleys, p. 34

[fn:14] Gleanings from the Writings of Bahá'u'lláh, p. 260

[fn:15] The Hidden Words of Bahá'u'lláh, p. 23
