:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       8C87F149-2E5E-4CE1-9599-D617AA00933E
:SLUG:     kingdom-of-names
:END:
---
title: Kingdom of Names
tags: journal
---

The first task of Adam, in the book of Genesis, was to name everything
he saw in the world; to fit each thing into a unit; to create a new
world of symbols and references, which might be called the Kingdom of
Names. What rules these names is the spirit animating their lifeless
bodies, the /sine qua non/ of nomenclature. Yet, Adam did not name the
world itself; he named what he saw in the world.

The names we use give form to our perceptions, and are like a castle
erected on a marvellous foundation. To discover this foundation,
consider the dictionary. It is filled with every name of the Kingdom of
Names, each with its own definition. However, every definition is given
in terms of other words within the same book. The dictionary is
completely circular. What breaks the circle? How can something entirely
self-referential refer to things outside itself? How can it /mean/
anything? It would be like petting a cat, and thinking there's really a
"cat" under our hand.

Our sense of meaning is built on a foundation that is all meaning and no
definition; until somehow, we are able to marry our experience of that
world with a book that is all definition and no meaning. That we do this
is something "wondrous strange", though later we come to justify these
connections by the benefits they yield. We apply the dictionary in the
ways that improve our lives. It's really something of a spell book.

So we see something outside, and link it to "tree". Tree links to
"wood", wood links to "fire", and fire links to "warmth". We try the
relations out, and they work. We mark the success for later use. If
another person comes along talking about "trees", we can listen to them
and hear "warmth". That's really what "tree" does for us in this case;
otherwise, the dictionary has added nothing to what was there before
"tree" was defined.

Building further, we establish a huge range of concepts and notions all
interconnected, matching various words with the products that benefit
our lives. "Tree" goes to "paper", "river" goes to "fish", "wind" goes
to "power", etc. Countless formulae appear, which allow us to turn
perceptions into results. We can even use better and more accurate ways
to describe these relationship, until we get really concise and
powerful, with definitions like "e=mc2". Now we know that "matter" goes
to "energy".

All these words build upon our foundation of experience until we make it
a very beautiful, very comfortable castle indeed. It may have a draft in
the winter, or be awful to clean, but it serves our purposes extremely
well, keeping us safe and secure inside. So safe and secure, in fact,
there's hardly a need to step outside.

But what if, some day, a stranger knocks on the door, talking about
things we've never seen. To talk at all, he has to use words from our
dictionary. Though since he's not from around here, there's no telling
what foundation he means. He says "tree", which goes to "wood" and
"warmth", but what does his "tree" /mean/, since "wood" and "warmth"
only tell us what trees can do, not what they /are/. In fact, beacuse
the stranger's experience of life is very different from our own, it
means nothing to talk of "trees", since the only "tree" we know is part
of our castle's definition. The stranger isn't saying anything to us,
really; just reminding us of our own past.

How can we ever know what a stranger is saying? The words makes sense,
and we can see the pictures they form in our minds, but what does it
mean? Is there any way to know?

A particular case of this are the words of God. A messenger appears
begins using common words to describe an uncommon reality (if it were
indeed common, why send a messenger?). We read these words and see what
the words means in terms of our own perceptions of our own reality --
not in terms of the messenger's perceptions of God's reality. How can we
bridge so wide a gap? Without experiencing his reality directly, does it
do any good to read the words at all?

Interestingly enough, most religious texts do not really set out to
describe a different reality, except insofar as to motivate us. On the
whole, they seem more interesting at getting us to recognize the Kingdom
of Names we've locked ourselves into, that we might learn to step
outside. And this, to resume our journey of the mind, onward to the next
step. They are more teachings of freedom, than a manual for building
more ornate castles. At least this is how I read them. It is not how
they are always read.

So tonight I look around, and suddenly see walls where I thought there
was clear sky. Because now I see that I see "sky", thinking the "sky" is
really there. My dictionary is telling me what exists, rather than me
telling my dictionary. The two of us would go hand-and-hand through the
real world of the bizarre, if only we'd straighten out this
relationship...

I say my prayers now, and have no inkling of the reality they refer to.
In fact, thinking I did know was keeping me from understanding them at
all. So I tried saying my payer without knowing, and yet /knowing/, and
it was like a two-dimensional picture given depth. There is so much
strange "in heaven and earth" -- without leaving my bedroom! This has
been quite a head trip so far.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
"O day and night, but this is wondrous strange!"

#+END_QUOTE

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
"And therefore as a stranger give it welcome. There are more things in
heaven and earth, Horatio, Than are dreamt of in your philosophy."

#+END_QUOTE

#+END_QUOTE
