:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       0E82FE75-83C0-4452-817E-1679F7A69716
:SLUG:     on-meditation
:END:
#+filetags: :essays:
#+title: On meditation

As for any set form of meditation, we have the following from the
letters of Shoghi Effendi:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
As to meditation: This also is a field in which the individual is free.
There are no set forms of meditation prescribed in the teachings, no
plan as such, for inner development. The friends are urged-nay
enjoined-to pray, and they also should meditate, but the manner of doing
the latter is left entirely to the individual.[fn:1]

#+END_QUOTE

So as far as recommendations go, I'm afraid that all I have to offer are
personal suggestions.

There are many grades of meditation. The simplest form occurs when we
ponder a certain point expressed in the Writings. As we plunge deeper
and deeper, meanings begin to unravel like the skin of an onion.
Suddenly we realize a connectivity latent in all things which defies the
limits of our comprehension. This moment of intellectual frustration
usually results in a feeling of awe, and of mental tiredness. After this
point, I often fall asleep.

A more subtle meditation involves releasing the mind from its material
condition. We are all created of God. With respect to Him, in the field
of true existence, none of us exist. "How can utter nothingness gallop
its steed in the field of preexistence, or a fleeting shadow reach to
the everlasting sun?" We are simply manifestations of the Will of our
Creator, as thoughts are the manifestation of our own will. But do
thoughts have any reality? They have a conditioned reality; their
existence depends on us, though at the same time they may have a
profound effect on us.

Noticing this lack of true existence, and plumbing its depths, is
another form of meditation. One understands that the words of God are
not simply true -- they /are/ Truth. Every veil interposing itself
between ourselves and the truth of His words is a foreign element. When
we ponder the mercy and justice of God, does not a feeling of indignance
sometimes creep up on us? We think, "How can God allow such things to
happen in the world? Isn't He the All-Powerful?" But God's Will is His
own. `Abdu'l-Bahá has written a beautiful prayer expressing this
intention:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
O thou who art turning thy face towards God! Close thine eyes to all
things else, and open them to the realm of the All-Glorious. Ask
whatsoever thou wishest of Him alone; seek whatsoever thou seekest from
Him alone. With a look He granteth a hundred thousand hopes, with a
glance He healeth a hundred thousand incurable ills, with a nod He
layeth balm on every wound, with a glimpse He freeth the hearts from the
shackles of grief. He doeth as He doeth, and what recourse have we? He
carrieth out His Will, He ordaineth what He pleaseth. Then better for
thee to bow down thy head in submission, and put thy trust in the
All-Merciful Lord.[fn:2]

#+END_QUOTE

As this self-knowledge of our existence through God dawns, the mind
experiences a wonderful sense of freedom. The gates of the City of
Certitude open, and we are no longer at odds with our Faith. In this
condition we are able to apprehend the truths that were invisible to us
before. The key is to know, from the bottom-most depths of our heart,
that God's creation is His own. "He doth what He willeth, ordaineth what
He pleaseth." If He were to treat us unfairly, and to manifest nothing
but cruelty, that same injustice would be Justice, and that same
cruelty, the essence of kindliness. As Bahá'u'lláh has written in a
prayer:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
My God, Whom I worship and adore! I bear witness unto Thy unity and Thy
oneness, and acknowledge Thy gifts, both in the past and in the present.
Thou art the All-Bountiful, the overflowing showers of Whose mercy have
rained down upon high and low alike, and the splendors of Whose grace
have been shed over both the obedient and the rebellious.

O God of mercy, before Whose door the quintessence of mercy hath bowed
down, and round the sanctuary of Whose Cause loving-kindness, in its
inmost spirit, hath circled, we beseech Thee, entreating Thine ancient
grace, and seeking Thy present favor, that Thou mayest have mercy upon
all who are the manifestations of the world of being, and to deny them
not the outpourings of Thy grace in Thy days.

All are but poor and needy, and Thou, verily, art the All-Possessing,
the All-Subduing, the All-Powerful.[fn:3]

#+END_QUOTE

The point is that God embraces all things, and nothing embraces God. The
age-old question, "Can God create a rock too heavy for Himself to lift,"
presupposes that God can be placed in a condition of lifting something
external. But His Essence is unknowable. This means that no thought we
have ever formed -- however lofty -- excluding the words of Prophets of
God, has ever been close to the truth. It could be stated that we have
never thought of God before, nor known Him. Every definition we have for
"God" is false; every supposition of knowledge, groundless. The only
sourcebook we have is the Teachings of His Manifestations.

This is because God desires for us to know Him. Why He desires this is
His own affair. The fact that he wishes us to worship Him -- even though
He is beyond all need of worship, and nothing we can ever affirm of Him
is true -- is also entirely up to Him. He asks us to state in the short
obligatory prayer, "I bear witness, O my God, that thou hast created me
to know Thee and to worship Thee."

Plants were created to receive light from the sun and carbon-dioxide
from the air. When they do not do this, they grow sick and die. Animals
were created to eat food and drink water. When they do not do this, they
also die. And humans were created to know and worship God. If we neglect
this duty, we too will die.

This is the heart of meditation, to me: when the mind realizes its own
nature, and in that moment turns toward God with a sincere heart. What
else were we created for? Although a discussion of worship would take a
long time, it is the basis. Prayer, work, service, good deeds: this is
what we are. And until we realize it, we will be incapable of loving one
another. Can hungry wolves abide together in the same cage? Do plants in
a dark room make for a good garden? We are depriving ourselves of the
very reason for our being, and this has set us at odds with one another.

[fn:1] Directives from the Guardian, p. 35

[fn:2] Selections from the Writings of `Abdu'l-Bahá, p. 51

[fn:3] Bahá'u'lláh, Prayers and Meditations, p. 250
