:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       6716E6E7-500A-469C-9A26-19756D78D9FE
:SLUG:     attar-on-unity
:END:
---
title: "`Attár on Unity"
tags: journal
---

Farídu'd-Dín `Attár, a 12th century Sufi poet, wrote a mystical poem
called the Conference of the Birds (my favorite translation is in prose,
by S. C. Nott).

In this poem, several thousand birds decide to set out on a journey to
their Immortal King, along an inward path fraught with difficulty.
Guiding them is the Hoopoe, who tells of the stages of the journey in
verse, and relates various allegories to help the birds comprehend the
requirements of the journey.

By the end, all of the birds perish but thirty, who barely make it to
the doorstep of the King. But that part of the tale I leave to the
reader...

How this story connects to my recent thoughts comes in the fifth of the
seven valleys of the journey: the Valley of Unity. Since this is a
mystical station I am trying very hard to understand right now, I
decided to go back and read what the Hoopoe said about it, and found
these lines:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
In this valley everything is broken in pieces and then unified. All who
raise their heads here raise them from the same collar. Although you
seem to see many beings, in reality there is only one -- all make one
which is complete in its unity. Again, that which you see as a unity is
not different from that which appears in numbers. And as the Being of
whom I speak is beyond unity and numbering, cease to think of eternity
as before and after; and since these two eternities have vanished, cease
to speak of them. When all that is visible is reduced to nothing, what
is there left to contemplate? ...

The day will come when the Sun will draw aside the veil which covers it.
So long as you are separate, good and evil will arise in you, but when
you lose yourself in the sun of the divine essence they will be
transcended by love. While you loiter on the road you will be held back
by faults and weaknesses...

When the spiritual traveller enters this valley he will disappear and be
lost to sight because the Unique Being will manifest himself; he will be
silent because this Being will speak.

The part will become the whole, or rather, there will be neither part
nor whole. In the School of the Secret you will see thousands of men
with intellectual knowledge, their lips parted in silence. What is
intellectual knowledge here? It stops on the threshold of the door like
a blind child. He who discovers something of this secret turns his face
from the kingdom of the two worlds. The Being I speak of does not exist
separately; everyone is this Being, existence and non-existence is this
Being.

#+END_QUOTE
