:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       6F962027-9512-4BF6-8A83-7EBAA86346A7
:SLUG:     religions-object
:END:
---
title: Religion's object
tags: journal
---

Looking at religion as a system of morals and teachings directed toward
a goal, I find it has two general forms depending on the desired object.
Firstly, and by far the most common, is "religion for the self"; the
rarer form is "religion for God". Every religion I've looked at,
including my own, has adherents in both camps -- even if they agree on
doctrine. It has to do with the psychological orientation of the
believer, and what he seeks from that doctrine.

* Religion for the self
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: religion-for-the-self
:END:
Religion for the self is easy to conceive and teach. It doesn't require
the introduction of new concepts, because the self is well-known to
everyone.

Basically, this religion offers transformation of some kind as a reward
for following it: salvation, redemption, self-perfection, freedom from
self, etc. It seeks to empower or free the individual, with the idea
that the result will be better than what they have.

In this scheme there are two basic stages of the individual: flawed and
perfect. This division of states creates an essential conflict between
who the believer is, and who he seeks to be. It implies a constant
measuring, to check whether he has done "enough" to merit the reward. If
salvation is instant, still he must guard against losing it. It is a
system based on acquisition -- an acquired change of some sort -- with
all the resulting complexes of attachment and fear of failure.

This measuring and fear easily lead to self-deprecation and exhaustion,
since the goal is either practically unattainable, or the offered
salvation is too easily lost. The self is constantly beaten into shape,
prodded, and kept on the chosen path.

The degree of dissatisfaction produced by such a system is intense. This
stems from its negative conception of life, looking at the self always
in terms of what it isn't. Life is viewed as a lack of attainment, or a
constant temptation to fall; it is not beautiful. The highest station
life can attain is death after having lived it "correctly".

The focus here is on duty and morals, with punishment always much closer
than reward. There is little joy, for even when advances are made, they
also remind the believer how far he has left to go.

God in this system is the ultimate Arbiter, the final Judge. He accepts
the worthy into His inner circle, while the rest are excluded. He
approves of moral conduct, and condemns heedlessness. He is a God to be
frightened of, since one's eternity rests in His hands based on what he
has done with his life. At least when one is alive, there is always a
chance of doing better. Death closes the door on future efforts, making
it a truly scary thing. If you have not made the grade by the time you
die, God will mete out His justice to you.

Many people reject this kind of religion because it causes so much
anxiety, with only a conditional promise of reward after death. Unless
you have tremendous faith, or really believe in your ability to make the
grade, why bother? It has a huge upside potential, but is a waste of
life if unreal. Full of limits and conditions, its only real incentive
lies beyond death.

With that said, this approach can still be valuable for some, since it
is so easily grasped; and the moral alignment that results can be of
great help in the long-term. Our culture has a penchant for this type of
method, as can be witnessed in the proliferation of self-help books on
the market, most of which offer a secular form of the same kind of
self-oriented program of change.

* Religion for the Beloved
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: religion-for-the-beloved
:END:
This rarer form of religion is mostly unknown to the mass of people,
though it does occur in various forms throughout the world. It's rarity
comes from how difficult it is to describe its aim: reunion with the
Beloved. How do you talk about something a person has yet to discover?
It can only be discussed using similar experiences for example.
(Although one can, by their happiness, indicate that it has a source,
and then maybe others will wonder about that Source).

This scheme has no "perfect" state. If you stand outside, you will be
warmed by the sun. The longer you stay out, the warmer you will get.
Receiving the light has nothing to do with "you", only that you stand in
the open. And the more you're outside, the more light you will receive,
which will begin to have other benefits for you.

There is no conflict here. You are never at odds with yourself. To visit
a museum, you don't have to be a perfect individual. If you study the
principles and history of art, you might appreciate the paintings more
than someone who hasn't, however. Perceiving the beauty of art is
entirely up to you: Do you want to look into it? Give it some time?
Study it intently? Education will assist you, but the focus is always on
the art, not the viewer.

Motivation to improve is thus relative to how much a person longs for
the Goal. Anyone who has loved something enough will do anything to be
near it. Every step that brings them closer bears its own gifts. This
kind of religion is a thing of constant, ever-increasing joy. There is
no need to fear the Beloved will reject you: He simply waits for those
who wish to approach Him, even helping anyone who makes an effort.
"Whoso maketh efforts for Us, in Our ways will We guide him."

This process can be started from complete ignorance. You needn't know
about your eye in order to use it. What you do need is to free it from
all dust and distraction, open the lid, and look in the right direction.
Further understanding will let you see things from other perspectives,
though some kinds of knowledge can be found intuitively.

God in this system is the Beloved, for Whom the soul has always longed,
potentially or actually. The soul is a tender plant, and God, the Sun.
The real issue in our case is that heliotropism must be learned and
intentionally chosen.

Those who reject this kind of religion, reject the Beloved before
realizing who He is. Mostly I think people reject the former kind of
religion, not knowing that a baby is going out with the bath-water. For
the Beloved is the Answer to all questions, the Goal of all hopes. One
only needs faith that He exists to be found, and he will assuredly find
Him. "He who seeketh out a thing with zeal shall find it."
