:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       59F48434-7F99-4945-9512-488E2D432251
:SLUG:     modes-of-seeing-reality
:END:
#+filetags: :essays:
#+title: Modes of Seeing Reality

The sun that arose yesterday and the sun that rises tomorrow are
considered the same because the idea referred to by "sun" has not
changed. The atoms of its surface may have changed entirely, the
configuration of its energy, the pattern of its magnetic fields; but in
terms of the attributes we mean by "sun", nothing has changed.

The word, then, does not refer to a present reality, but to an idea
whose purpose is to abstract the basic principle of the individual suns
presented over time. If "sun" meant any one sun, it would cease to be
true even before it was spoken. This same holds for individuals, all of
whose atoms will have changed to a different configuration by the time
one conceives the thought.

Time permits minute transformations so constant that the physical bodies
we give names to have little to do with reality. The distance of
electrons from the parent nucleus is such that, if time were entirely
stopped, all we could see in place of Earth would be dark space. But
since electrons whirl at tremendous speeds, and because changing energy
states allow photons to be absorbed and retransmitted, time permits a
visual perception of "things" whose reality is otherwise
imperceptible.[fn:1]

These "things", then, like the "sun", do not refer to real compositions
of elements, but to more abstract conceptions inferred from the
consistencies among the transformations of those elements. These
successive temporal impressions impinge on the memory, and owing to a
lack of fundamental differentiation from earlier counterparts, an imago
is formed in the mind to which we can apply a word like "sun".

This demonstrates that the "sun" is not the sun. Nor can the real sun
ever be known in the same way as ideas, since it changes before
consciousness has an opportunity to conceive of its prior state. This
leaves us with two modes of apprehending reality: Cognitively, by the
process of ideation that abstract ideas and principles from constantly
changing particulars; and directly, by the mere fact that our own
existence is part of the reality of which we are aware.

If direct experience could not take place, it would mean one can only
live in the ideational landscape presented by the mind -- in the
summarized projection of actual reality. However, since this process of
summary is indeed taking place -- as evidenced by the imagos resulting
from it -- then at some level we must be aware of the contents to which
these summaries refer. That is, for an awareness of "sun" to exist,
there must at some level be an awareness of the actual sun, even if
pre-consciously we transcend those infinitesimal experiences to arrive
at the truncated abstraction, "sun".

Some religious philosophies propose that we turn fully to the direct
experience of reality by forgoing cognitive apperception. By emptying
the mind, by meditation, the avoidance of words, resisting processes of
identification, we can experience what is real by refusing to reduce it
in terms of human understanding.

This approach, while it appreciates the value of the realities founding
our experience of life, neglects the nobility of the mind in its ability
to perceive underlying principles. If direct experience is being aware
of the infinite variety of life, then apperception is the discovery of
the fundamental unities underlying this variety.

Were human happiness found only in a direct perception of reality, there
would be little reason to argue in favor of apperception. But can one be
happy who denies their nature? If use of the mind is a natural
inclination -- and pursuing knowledge causes enough joy to suggest this
is so -- then ideation must take its place among the higher pursuits.

What does ideation offer? There are some who scorn science because it
removes people from life, while others -- the physicists -- find so much
joy in the idea of ultimate theories of life that they dedicate their
lives to it. They obviously enjoy something that fully engages their
attention. Perhaps both kinds of awareness offer something to the soul.

Returning to the analogy of the sun, we cognize the abstract term "sun"
by transcending[fn:2] the sequence of individual suns that present
themselves over a course of time. One could say we glean a principle
from the variegation of phenomena; that reality offers us a set of
impressions, which are consistent in some regard, and our intellect is
capable of identifying the nature of this consistency. In the case of
the sun, it is light, warmth, location, etc., in contrast to its
ever-varying quantity of atoms.

Yet the longer we spend in our study of the sun, the more we discover
that even in the flux of atomic configurations there are general
principles to be discovered. This perception of principle from phenomena
seems capable of as much profundity as the degree of our attention, with
the result that physicists continue to grow hopeful of finding a single
set of laws that will describe the exceedingly complex interactions of
the universe.

The motive underlying this search for a general description of reality
is perhaps more than mere intellectual curiosity. Whenever principles
are discovered there is a feeling of release from the vagaries of time,
coupled with a deep appreciation of how ably time plays out the
consequences of such principles. We detach ourselves from the
inexplicable character of phenomena -- with the danger of separating
ourselves from life; while those who pursue direct experience unify
themselves with phenomena at the risk of becoming incurious.

Direct experience appears to exercise the extroverted nature in man: our
ability to sympathize and sacrifice the coherence of our identity in
order to know more intimately what is external to the self; while
apperception exercises our introverted nature by abstracting from the
many toward an inner experience of the one. The fewer the laws,
principles, and ideas, which are needed to describe life, the more
harmonious and unified our relationship to it. For whereas objects are
constantly different, they are also always the same. These two modes of
reality are coexistent, so it makes sense that human beings pursue two
modes of comprehending that reality.

The ideal of direct experience is that nothing is ever the same: each
moment is always new, unexplored, mysterious. The ideal of apperception
is that everything is familiar and well-known; that even between people
who have never met, there is a deeper bond uniting them as though
instances of a single entity. Consider a universe full of mirrors, with
a single light shining into all of them. On the one hand, since the
angles of the mirror are different -- and the effect is compounded by
reflected reflections -- one sees a rich universe filled with variety
and complexity; on the other hand, since there is only light, all that
is ever seen is that light -- and to know the light well enough is to
know the potential for its variation in the mirrors.

If we call these two experiences of life immanence and transcendence,
then the fullest development of man would consist in an appreciation of
both: the unity of life and the diversity of life. So the magnifying
feeling that comes through the discovery of general principles is as
potent as the feeling of knowing that every morn and evening is
different from those that came before.

Without denying or demeaning the richness of every drop filling the sea,
yet it is also true that each drop conveys all the ocean's secrets, and
that even in an atom one may discern the signature of the laws governing
the whole expanse of the universe. All things proceed revolve around a
single principle, while no matter how much we may experience, one is
astonished at the infinite forms this purpose has called into being.

[fn:1] Since even electrons exist through the whirling interactions of
       subatomic particles, is there even a "reality" when time is
       stopped?

[fn:2] Such transcendence of phenomena is discussed at length by the
       phenomenologist schools of thought.
