:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       60DA4918-8425-4796-B88A-BF1069775B78
:SLUG:     at-one-with-everything
:END:
---
title: At one with everything?
tags: journal
---

As I drive along the highway, losing myself to the being of Driving, I
find that a couple strange things occur: First, I no longer feel a sense
of loneliness. The road, the car, the passing trees, and I, all create
something together of which we're all a part. It feels like a community
of spirit, a greater experience that we all share. Funny that the road
could seem like a friend, but in those moments it does.

Second, I start to hear the road and the car -- and everything else --
talking to me. They don't use words, of course, but through my intuition
the road tells me how to steer, the engine tells me how to shift and
apply the gas, the trees tell me where to look for possible dangers. As
one, an intimate communication develops, which also dispels my feeling
of loneliness.

My instinct is to say I am becoming "one with the road", but I find
something wrong in that. When I think of my body, I think of it as a
unit: it functions as a unit, the parts interact as a unit. It may be
that the brain and heart are more critical to its operation, but this
does not mean that my body is "my heart becoming one with the other
organs". Speaking of my body in terms of any one part being "one" with
the others sounds strange. There is only one "body", which is made up of
"body parts". Viewed as a separate, they are separate; viewed as a
whole, there is only the whole. It would sound odd to say that one part
is at one with the other parts.

The same holds for myself. If I imagine I am "one with the road", I am
still failing to accept the unity of Driving. I am not giving my
selfhood up to it. I still want to be an "I" who is "at one" with other
things. But there is only Driving. As parts, we each have our names; but
as a greater unity, we all disappear. There is no room for self within
the higher Beings we participate in.

It is so natural to constantly set myself apart from the world that I
can see why unity is so difficult for me to grasp. It is all around us,
all the time -- the unity of our body, of the ecosystem, of natural
phenomena -- but instinctively the mind wants to name and categorize;
not for a particular purpose, but as though to establish the /being/ of
the things it sees, and thus make itself the ground of its experience of
being.

There is an enormous difference between relating to a name, as a symbol,
and relating to it as if it were real. [[file:jul2004][This July]] I
wrote several entries on the difference between these two: ideas and
reality. The kind of naming that makes unity difficult to grasp is when
I see things /through/ their names, rather than just using the name to
direct my eyes.

So I find myself in the situation of driving along, being "I" with
respect to myself -- and an odd form of nothingness with respect to
Driving -- when suddenly I look at the road passing under me and think,
"I am driving this car." That is like the brain claiming it moves my
limbs, when in fact countless organic processes occur between my
intention and the muscle's contraction. In the abstract, yes, I drive
the car, but in reality, there is only Driving.

This leads me to realize that the unity of Driving itself is just part
of another unity. Driving combined with Destination make Travel. Joined
with Purpose these form Wayfaring. And so on. All these unities, each
part of a higher unity -- until they merge into an Absolute Unity. This
Absolute Unity is where all the differences between the lesser Unities
are subsumed, and where their identities disappear.

In this station of Being, every beginning and end is merged. Even the
concepts of beginning and end are swept away. They remain separate in
regard to themselves, but naught with respect to the All. Can anyone say
where the body begins and ends? A particular process, perhaps, but as a
whole, there is a only a unified organic movement. I may be driving home
in one aspect of my being, but I am also simultaneously leaving and
returning: still in relation to my car, speeding along in relation to
the highway. All of these particulars, each subsumed in the unity it
helps to form, until all of them are lost in the final, Absolute Unity.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
This is the plane whereon the vestiges of all things are destroyed in
the traveler, and on the horizon of eternity the Divine Face riseth out
of the darkness, and the meaning of "All on the earth shall pass away,
but the face of thy Lord...." is made manifest.

#+END_QUOTE

Sometimes I refer to this as "being one with everything", but now I
suspect this phrase is confusing me. Referring oneness to my self only
enforces the sense of separation. Rather, on the plane of the Absolute,
there is only that. There is only the being of an All which is neither
many, nor one-in-contrast-to-many. It combines even the concepts of
manyness and oneness. Hmm.... what is that Being... If oneness with it
is anything like giving myself up to Driving, I would think all
loneliness should disappear, and that the universe would start "talking"
to me. That sounds like a good experiment.
