:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       AD94D9FD-6D99-4CC6-B931-7EA7D5958100
:SLUG:     relying-on-one-another
:END:
---
title: Relying on one another
tags: essays
---

Upon the great ocean of life we sit in a boat. This boat represents the
sphere of our contact with the world outside. Beyond us, we can see the
bright blue waters extending for miles and miles, and below us, the
depths receding quickly away into an unfathomed deep.

When we first enter life, we sit like a child on the bottom of that
boat. Life decrees that we move forward and progress, yet we sit
motionless. Without progress, we die; without anyone to help us, we die.

So our parents, being loving, attach to us like a tugboat and pull us
forward. The going is slow, but it is steady. We cannot choose our
course, but at least we're moving. This is the condition of dependence.

But as we grow older, we see other places we'd like to go. Our arms grow
stronger, and we figure out how to use the pair of oars that are sitting
nearby. By dipping them into the water and pulling on them, we are able
to frustrate the steady course that has been chosen by our parents. This
causes some turmoil, but it makes us aware of our ability to choose a
different path.

Through practice, and an increase in strength, we are able one day to
struggle and break free of the tugboat's hold. Now we are on our own; we
are choosing our own destiny. This is the condition of independence.

Those who are independent realize that their only means to success is
self-made decisions. If they do not choose to work, no one else will be
able to make them successful. It is the same with virtue. No one
conditions the heart of another person.

Being in this position, the independent person learns how best to
maximize their talents. They learn how to row the oars faster, how to
build up stronger arms, how to use the current to their advantage -- but
they are still moving relatively slowly. Can anyone realistically row
around the world? Maybe a few people can, but not everyone.

So there is another step. From independence we learn how to choose our
own goals, based on our own values. Yet it is through interdependence
that we derive that very important quality of speed. Only through
interdependence can the majority of us make it around the world. Many
independent people understand the goals they want to accomplish, but
these goals are too audacious for them to achieve.

In the condition of interdependence we become aware that there are masts
rising up from the center and ends of our boat. These masts have always
been there, but we didn't know their purpose. These masts represent the
people who are close to us in this life.

When our relationships are well-developed, it is liking hoisting up
huge, fine sails upon the masts. And when we are loving, it produces the
wind that billows in the sails. How much faster a sailing ship is than
one powered by oars! In times of stillness we can still fall back on our
talents of independence -- thus ensuring forward motion -- but true
progress is gained only with the help of our friends.

Think about the captain of a sailing ship, as opposed to the rower. The
captain does not spend his time toiling at the oars. The ship is moving
of its own, powered by the immense winds that swirl about. With such
freedom, the captain has time to direct, rather than having to spur
himself on. Instead of pushing himself towards his goal, he simply has
to point his ship in the right direction.

This is the power of a unified team of like-minded souls. As
individuals, independent though we may be, there is plenty of
aspiration, but what can we produce? As a team, not only do we glide
toward our destination with facility, but we also enjoy the pleasure of
reaching there together.
