:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       693E3875-8A37-41B1-90F0-6881581AFB9D
:SLUG:     serving-joyfully
:END:
#+filetags: :essays:
#+title: Serving joyfully

Someone asked: /What is happiness? What does the Bahá'í Faith say about
being in a good mood? About being in a bad mood? What is the chief means
of achieving a happy, good mood in the Bahá'í Faith? Are cognitive or
other approaches or methods to mood elevation besides prayer wrong?/

I don't think anything connected to joy, that is not denied by the laws
of Bahá'u'lláh, is "wrong". } There are many people who will answer the
above question by saying "serve the Cause, pray". But this does not
result in joy for everyone. Deriving pure joy from serving of others is
a spiritual station that takes time and insight to achieve. It is not
automatic.

In the meantime, learning how to be joyful is an important element of
one's life, since people who are joyful typically provide better service
than those who aren't!

So if the essence of life for human beings is love and service, and if
joy is an important element to serving others, and not everyone derives
joy just from serving, what is the answer?

It's simple: Life is meant to be organic, to grow in stages. Don't
expect perfection at every turn. It's certainly VERY OK to look for fun
and joy in places other than prayer and service, so long as the Divine
Laws are observed (and these are really quite few in number).

I once was involved in a service project with a Bahá'í friend who had an
excellent attitude: We serve, then we play. Every Saturday we would go
to another town, teach and serve people there for several hours, and
then spend the rest of the day doing things that were purely for
enjoyment -- going out to movies, dinner, taking a trip to the ocean,
etc.

The result? We looked forward to serving every weekend, because we knew
the whole day would be rewarding -- both to ourselves and to others. I
would always look forward to SOME part of the day. After awhile, this
fun spirit began to permeate the whole day, until even the time spent in
service had a joyfulness to it.

Anyway, my advice is to avoid Puritanist ethics like the plague. It is
/good/ to spend money on yourself[fn:1] and to enjoy one's existence.
While doing so, begin to factor some kind of regular service into your
life. You will find that as your reserves of joy increase, your capacity
/and your desire/ to serve will also increase. Once this cycle reaches
the point that the service itself is fun, you will begin fulfilling
those quotations that have already been mentioned.

The point is that life is a process of growth, not a leap into imitating
a perfected existence. And happiness and joy water that growth far, far
more effectively than guilt and self-recrimination.

[fn:1] "The beginning of magnanimity is when man expendeth his wealth on
       himself, on his family and on the poor among his brethren in his
       Faith." -- Tablets of Bahá'u'lláh, p. 156
