:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       9837DE7C-ABCC-4E51-8A48-E2DE6F187A99
:SLUG:     religion-does-not-get-harder
:END:
---
title: Religion does not get harder
tags: essays
---

I am doubtful of the conventional Western attitude toward religion, that
is hard, requires strenuous effort, and after all that just keeps
getting harder.

This view tends to leave out everyone who is not strongly motivated by
their sense of duty or shame. It makes it seems like this is all some
herculean struggle between one part of myself and another, which only
the best may participate in.

Contrary to this view, I have been developing the understanding that
religion is actually the simplest of all things, and only keeps getting
easier. Mainly this is because we rely upon God more, but there are
other, more banal factors as well.

For example, telling the truth is much easier than telling a lie,
because lies require maintenance whereas the truth stands by itself. The
truth may be more painful, or difficult for our ego, but the /act of
doing it/ is easier.

And that is where I see the difficulty of religion: one must be willing
to prefer the Will of God over one's own will. Yet once this willingness
is in place, pursuing it is easier than ordinary life.

A further example: truly religious activity is joyful and fulfilling. It
gives one greater strength to continue. There are tests, but as one
grows in spirit, these tests become an exciting challenge, full of
reward. Whereas one who ignores spirituality, however easy their path
may seem, it is constantly fraught with little frustrations, anger and
dissatisfaction. Life becomes so short and impermanent, that one is
constantly forced to hurry along, or deny the ever-present truth that
life is flexible and inconstant.

Religion allows one to relax in the truth, in a sense, and to share the
larger movements of eternity. At every point one must be willing to be a
part of this -- and this willingness can be hard -- but difficulty lies
in the choice, not the action.

Life needn't be a constant battle with one's self, always full of
tension, opposition, and negativity. This hatred that develops of the
spiritual side for the material, neglects the fact that spirituality is
dependent upon material means, and that the two CAN work together
harmoniously. It is a question of balance and placement, not superiority
and control.

Perhaps because Western life desires control, we seek control over our
own spirituality -- a sense of possessing a consistent spiritual mode
that will allow us to act and appear as we desire most. But the essence
of this quest is to let go, and allow one's self to become part of a
vaster scheme, appreciating and acknowledging that our part is divinely
ordained, although perhaps not as spectacular as we might wish.

What is harder than accepting that next to God, even the infinity of our
nature is infinitely small? It's a bitter pill to swallow, to believe
that what we do matters less than the context in which we do it. If that
context is not ripe, or changes, we must change. This is the nature of
contingent existence, and is denies all hope of control over destiny.

And at the very same time that this view is hard for a Western mind, it
is so much easier! Because it allows us to look to that context for
guidance, to pray to God for assistance, to permit inspiration, rather
than mere perspiration, to fuel our endeavors. It is hard /in the
essential sense/ -- perhaps the most difficult thing in life -- but easy
/in the actual sense/. Because religion is joy, the soul finding home, a
relaxation into the waiting, loving arms of God.

This is why I'd like to know if the Writings really depict life as
constantly arduous -- and then more arduous. If that is true, why would
anyone seek refuge with us? The Bahá'ís I know are tired out, and always
feeling more burdened. Most conferences I've been to (with the except of
the Kingdom Conference!) drill in the message: "You're not doing enough,
you must work harder, this is no easy game, do more, be more, give
more!!!!" In short, I leave these meetings depressed and anxious,
fearful of my future Day of Reckoning. Life seems so bleak, so tiring.
Weary of heart, it saps all my energy to continue.

Whereas when I listen to other speakers, who focus on love and
possibility -- such as Puva Merdi, in San Jose -- I always feel
uplifted, more aware of my awesome heritage. Instead of harping on duty
and obedience, I am told that someone loves me. That this love is more
important than what I do, and that my actions, should they share in such
love, will be far easier to accomplish. It is like being in love; if
your beloved asked you to help clean her house, or her car, you wouldn't
even remember doing it! The entirety of the act would be for her sake,
and her perfume is all you'd remember.

We often mention the worthlessness of this world, and how we should be
free of it. And yet, why focus on what we shouldn't see? Pay attention
to the giver, rather than the gift, and everything will /naturally,
easily, joyfully/ fall into place. Religion is the most natural state of
all, since we are in fact spiritual beings.

Likewise, why focus on duty and accomplishment, instead of its purpose?
We do all that we do to create an atmosphere of love and harmony for
every human being; an atmosphere in which all peoples can know and love
God without suffering, and in a spirit of brotherhood. Since the aim is
brotherhood-through-recognition-of-divine-origin, then to actively
realize this brotherhood is more important than whatever laws or
institutions might exist in the Faith! Those laws and institutions may
be necessary to achieve that goal, yet this does not mean that such laws
are primary in importance. Spirituality ranks higher than the medium of
spirituality. Here is a quote to clarify this:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Laws and institutions, as viewed by Bahá'u'lláh, can become really
effective only when our inner spiritual life has been perfected and
transformed. Otherwise religion will degenerate into a mere
organization, and becomes a dead thing...[fn:1]

#+END_QUOTE

Why wouldn't this be true on a larger scale as well? That our Faith
cannot become an effective refuge for humankind, until we perfect and
transform the nature of our interactions, and achieve a station of love
and amity which /makes doing things together natural, easy and joyful??/

It is my belief that mainly because we view as religion as hard,
unnatural and difficult, that most of our own membership has no interest
in Feast. I see this attitude as intricately linked with the
difficulties we now face. Secular life seems so easy, because we believe
it's easier! But actually, secular life does not offer what people need,
which is peace, love, true joy, happiness, security, etc. There is
enough duty, shame and guilt to last the world for countless
generations. Yet none of it comes from religion:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
... all the sorrow and the grief that exist come from the world of
matter -- the spiritual world bestows only the joy![fn:2]

#+END_QUOTE

`Abdu'l-Bahá even said that material development is dependent on this
love and amity:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Know ye, verily, that the happiness of mankind lieth in the unity and
the harmony of the human race, and that /spiritual and material
developments are conditioned upon love and amity among all men/.[fn:3]

#+END_QUOTE

And from Secret of Divine Civilization:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
It is certain that the greatest of instrumentalities for achieving the
advancement and the glory of man, the supreme agency for the
enlightenment and the redemption of the world, is love and fellowship
and unity among all the members of the human race.[fn:4]

#+END_QUOTE

Love and fellowship are easy to do! Making new friends may be hard, but
associating with current ones is how I want to spend my time!! How can
this fit with the view that religion is inherently difficult, when it is
exactly such fellowship and unity that is the bedrock of religion??

From Vignettes of `Abdu'l-Bahá:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
In 1909 Ethel Rosenberg made a pilgrimage to the Holy Land. Although He
was free, the Master had not yet left
=Akká to live in Haifa. Ethel asked Him what the friends could do to increase their numbers and to make their work more effective.  He answered that=the
members of the little groups should love each other very much and be
devoted friends. The more they loved each other, the more the meetings
would attract and draw others, and the more they loved, the more their
influence would be felt... I say also in English, that you may
understand how much I mean it, that love is the foundation of
everything...'

#+END_QUOTE

And lastly, from Shoghi Effendi, Directives from the Guardian (p. 41):

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
The Cause of God is endowed with tremendous powers, and the reason the
believers do not gain more from it is because they have not learned to
duly draw these mighty forces of love and strength and harmony generated
by the Faith.[fn:5]

#+END_QUOTE

Now, I don't know about you, but love feels good. Even if what happens
is physically or emotional painful, the fact that it is done with love
makes it easier to bear. Love lifts the burden of living from a sorrowed
heart. Love and joy make our thoughts keener, our creativity more fluid,
our inspiration plentiful. Isn't religion the primary source of all
love?

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
You must live in the utmost happiness. If any trouble or vicissitude
comes into your lives, if your heart is depressed on account of health,
livelihood or vocation, let not these things affect you. They should not
cause unhappiness, for Bahá'u'lláh has brought you divine happiness. He
has prepared heavenly food for you; He has destined eternal bounty for
you; He has bestowed everlasting glory upon you. Therefore, these glad
tidings should cause you to soar in the atmosphere of joy forever and
ever. Render continual thanks unto God so that the confirmations of God
may encircle you all.[fn:6]

#+END_QUOTE

When I read these talks, and talk in this vein with other people, I feel
relieved; I feel like the future peace of humanity is assured, and that
I can do something about it; I see that religion is not some awful,
dour, puritan torture machine. The focus is no longer on my spiritual
station, or future deliverance. The entire aim is the unity and
well-being of mankind, and this is the most joyful -- and easy --
condition of all.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Were men to discover the motivating purpose of God's Revelation, they
would assuredly cast away their fears, and, with hearts filled with
gratitude, rejoice with exceeding gladness.[fn:7]

The Great Being saith: O ye children of men! The fundamental purpose
animating the Faith of God and His Religion is to safeguard the
interests and promote the unity of the human race, and to foster the
spirit of love and fellowship amongst men.[fn:8]

O Son of Spirit! With the joyful tidings of light I hail thee: rejoice!
To the court of holiness I summon thee; abide therein that thou mayest
live in peace for evermore.

#+END_QUOTE

And so, although tests and trials may increase as we strive after truth,
the increase in our joy and ease that comes from reliance on God will
always outpace these difficulties. They become smaller and smaller,
dwindling away, until the station is reached where Bahá'u'lláh says:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
This station conferreth the true standard of knowledge, and freeth man
from tests. In this realm, to search after knowledge is irrelevant, for
He hath said concerning the guidance of travelers on this plane, "Fear
God, and God will instruct thee." And again: "Knowledge is a light which
God casteth into the heart of whomsoever He willeth."

Wherefore, a man should make ready his heart that it be worthy of the
descent of heavenly grace, and that the bounteous Cup-Bearer may give
him to drink of the wine of bestowal from the merciful vessel. "For the
like of this let the travailers travail!"

#+END_QUOTE

[fn:1] Directives from the Guardian, p. 87

[fn:2] `Abdu'l-Bahá, Paris Talks, p. 110

[fn:3] Selections from the Writings of `Abdu'l-Bahá, p. 286

[fn:4] `Abdu'l-Bahá, Secret of Divine Civilization, p. 73

[fn:5] Shoghi Effendi, Directives from the Guardian, p. 41

[fn:6] `Abdu'l-Bahá, Promulgation of Universal Peace, p. 188

[fn:7] Bahá'u'lláh, Gleanings, p. 175

[fn:8] ibid, p. 215
