:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       7FE7AECE-040A-453D-A7BE-843CCDADFFFC
:SLUG:     the-game-of-life
:END:
---
title: The game of life
tags: essays
---

Recently, there have been many interactive video games made available
that make games of the past seem trivial. Games like EverQuest, Ultima
Online, Asheron's Call, provide real-time virtual domains where one can
interact with friends, collect gold and equipment, solve quests, and
earn a reputation.

These games are so addictive that studies have been made, and
organizations created, to help people wean themselves from their
powerfully addictive nature.

Hmmm... making friends, collecting gold, earning a reputation, becoming
attached to your character and its progress... that sounds awfully
familiar...

Many gamers, after spending day-long binges at the screen, describe an
experience of "soul suck", or feeling that their vital essence has been
drained away by the actions of mouse and keyboard. One friend could not
stop until he realized that his gaming was just too similar to those rat
experiments, where a wire is connected to the pleasure center of the
rat's brain, and it pushes a button over and over again -- neglecting
sleep, food and health -- to get that "fix". In his case, it was a mouse
button (a perverse irony there), but the similarity of the experience
was too clear to be ignored.

However, games aren't bad. Played in moderation they are much better
than television, since they require skills of coordination, planning,
and they involve learning and memorization: none of which a sitcom
provides. It is the degree of absorption that worries parents and
players, not the game itself.

For what happens when the character dies, and everything is over? It
doesn't matter if Xena the Magnificent had one million gold pieces or
one, it all goes away in a single instant. Nothing is carried over into
"real life" except the lessons learned and the character traits that may
now appear in ordinary living. In fact, it is by asking, "What did I
gain from all that time and energy and devotion?" that some people
decide the game isn't worth continuing. Compared with the result, the
energy invested doesn't pay off. We could have been talking with real
friends, walking outside, making money, doing something constructive.

Or is even that investment so fruitful as we think?

Because yet another day awaits us all, when this game -- the game in
which you and I are players, and what your character is doing right now
is reading e-mail -- will be shut off, and then it doesn't matter if we
earned one million dollars or one; all we'll take with us is the lessons
learned and those character traits relevant enough to our soul that
they'll carry on. At that moment we may realize how little our
"investment" in this life truly pays off. Perhaps in the next world
there are even organizations, hard at work figuring out how to detach us
from our addiction to this very compelling game we share in. God sends a
Representative every thousand years or so to remind us of the fact.

But games aren't that bad. They test us, cause us to learn, setup mock
battles that perchance we will do better when the real fight comes. No,
it isn't the game that needs changing: but the player.

Some people who play games have fun, they enjoy themselves tremendously,
and use the game as a way to get closer to others. Party games
supposedly exist only for that purpose. We know that the "money" we're
spending is play money, and that the outcome of the game is irrelevant
if anyone isn't having fun. We play the game for the spirit it
engenders, and if it ceases to provide this, it's not worth continuing.

As we look at life, ponder how quickly it will all end; as fast as
pulling the plug on a round of EverQuest. All that seemed important, all
that appeared as gain, will vanish without a trace. Sure, the experience
of playing stays with you, but that depends on how you played the game.

The money you have with you now, it is play money. The house, the car,
the dog, these are but items in one's inventory -- tools the game
character uses to continue playing. Elves in EverQuest need food too,
they need transport. It's not that these things aren't important
relative to their purpose. But Elves aren't real! The horses they ride
aren't real! As for that Honda... we call it real? Are "man" and "woman"
real?

If the game leads to joy, if it unites the players, strengthening their
character, teaching them new things, great. As long as the player keeps
in mind that it is only a game, it's hard to go wrong. Staying mindful
of the context ensures that our idea of "success" is in keeping with the
game's true purpose.

It is only when we /identify/ ourselves with that ruddy dwarf in Ultima
Online that mishaps begin to bother us. Yet anyone will tell you, you're
/not/ that dwarf, it's only a silly game character! Hmm... I am not my
ego. That's not even a new concept.

Keep it light, play the game, enjoy. We're hear to make friends, and to
use the equipment in our roster to keep playing. But there's a reason
for not taking these things seriously: games just aren't a serious
matter.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Say: O people! Let not this life and its deceits deceive you, for the
world and all that is therein is held firmly in the grasp of His Will.
He bestoweth His favor on whom He willeth, and from whom He willeth He
taketh it away. He doth whatsoever He chooseth. Had the world been of
any worth in His sight, He surely would never have allowed His enemies
to possess it, even to the extent of a grain of mustard seed. He hath,
however, caused you to be entangled with its affairs, in return for what
your hands have wrought in His Cause. This, indeed, is a chastisement
which ye, of your own will, have inflicted upon yourselves, could ye but
perceive it. Are ye rejoicing in the things which, according to the
estimate of God, are contemptible and worthless, things wherewith He
proveth the hearts of the doubtful?[fn:1]

#+END_QUOTE

[fn:1] Bahá'u'lláh, Gleanings from the Writings of, p. 209
