:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       10A5E10E-8BB1-44F8-9CCD-52801EAA623C
:SLUG:     faith-and-reality
:END:
#+filetags: :journal:
#+title: Faith and reality

I have come to believe that faith has the power to create new realities.
This theme recurred to me after watching the film "Artificial
Intelligence", in which a robot boy's wish to become real -- so his
found-mother would love him -- begins a chain of events that lead him
ultimately to his goal. That "responsiveness" on the part of life to our
wishes is something I've reflected on for some time now, having seen its
effect again and again. Nor do I think faith alone has this power, but
that the yearnings of the soul are somehow heard -- and answered. From
the Bahá'í Writings:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Spirit has influence; prayer has spiritual effect. Therefore, we pray,
"O God! Heal this sick one!" Perchance God will answer. Does it matter
who prays? God will answer the prayer of every servant if that prayer is
urgent. His mercy is vast, illimitable. He answers the prayers of all
His servants. He answers the prayer of this plant. The plant prays
potentially, "O God! Send me rain!" God answers the prayer, and the
plant grows. God will answer anyone. He answers prayers potentially.
Before we were born into this world did we not pray, "O God! Give me a
mother; give me two fountains of bright milk; purify the air for my
breathing; grant me rest and comfort; prepare food for my sustenance and
living"? Did we not pray potentially for these needed blessings before
we were created? When we came into this world, did we not find our
prayers answered? Did we not find mother, father, food, light, home and
every other necessity and blessing, although we did not actually ask for
them? Therefore, it is natural that God will give to us when we ask Him.
His mercy is all-encircling.[fn:1]

#+END_QUOTE

Prayer being the expression of faith, the certitude of an answer, the
certainty of being heard: and yet, even if not in prayer, and only the
heart's longing -- if sincere -- I wonder that life doesn't relish such
spirit, and in return do whatever it can to make our hopes real...

Life these past months, though fraught with change and pain and some
anxiety, has been like a dream constantly unfolding. Am I the dreamer,
watching events come open like petals of flowers -- or am I the dream,
and the life I see around me, the truest definition of myself?

[fn:1] `Abdu'l-Bahá, Promulgation of Universal Peace, pp. 246-7
