:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       78975110-E007-4D7D-A69D-0B69611EA334
:SLUG:     joys-of-photography
:END:
#+filetags: :journal:
#+title: Joys of photography

Photography, my recent hobby, has been a source of unexpected joys --
made more significant by the fact that I never liked cameras before.

As fun as the camera itself has been, a few other things have been
happening lately, all of which I never expected, but that have been
nearly as much a boon as the hobby itself:

The first thing I noticed while surfing the web and reading about how
cameras work, is that an interest in photography leads you to looking at
other people's photography. I've seen more beautiful, /beautiful/
pictures in the past month than in my whole life of web surfing to date.

The second thing photography has changed for me is that now I venture
out much more during the daytime. Previously, I was nearly a
self-declared vampire. My schedule alone prompted vestigial fangs to
start making their protuberance known. Yet today I woke up early, did
everything I needed to, then went to Golden Gate Park looking for
pictures. And it's not just that photography gets me out of bed; it also
takes me to places I otherwise wouldn't have gone: to places off the
beaten path; to looking at the ground, the sky; to driving to remote
corners that have no reason to draw my interest -- except the chance of
a nice thing to view.

The third major impact it's had on me is to improve my eye for beauty. I
always loved beauty before; /loved/ it. I'm one of those people who can
be stopped in his tracks by the grain of an old fencepost. But little
did I know how much photography would further train my eye. I see
pictures everywhere now. I pay attention to lighting, texture, color
contrast, lines of perspective. With or without my camera, I take
pictures every day, experiencing those unique moments in time, letting
my soul breathe it in a few, full seconds, then exhaling with a deep
pleasure that I was able to see such things. Some I've even the good
fortune to capture; but the essential quest, I've learned, has nothing
to do with hardware.

All that effort, and often for only one image: a chance coincidence of
nature and device: when the beauty I see with my own eyes also rings
true in the final image -- or sometimes even, improved upon.

So today I count myself lucky to have driven around a few hours, seeing
what I saw, feeling what I felt, and then to come home with something
like the picture above (larger version forthcoming). I never thought
that from a simple box at the store would come so much. I guess it's a
matter of how much a thing helps us to know ourselves, that makes it
rich.
