:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       644F9573-C718-4530-9332-7DD7C8D4C49F
:SLUG:     the-poverty-of-ideas
:END:
#+filetags: :journal:
#+title: The poverty of ideas

This is excerpted from a recent chat with a friend. Many of the ideas
are taken from
[[http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/0394704681/qid=1089187494/sr=8-1/ref=pd_ka_1/104-5291186-8751115?v=glance&s=books&n=507846][The
Wisdom of Insecurity]], an amazing book by Alan Watts. The discussion
followed from this Zen quote:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
A student once asked his teacher, "Master, what is enlightenment?" The
master replied, "When hungry, eat. When tired, sleep."

#+END_QUOTE

I don't believe happiness lies in simply following the instincts of the
body. Abstract thinking has its place too. It only goes wrong when it
promises something more real than what is real. Take money for example:
We look at money, and think of all the things we could do with it, all
of which are ideas -- projections into unknown futures, concepts of a
life with that money -- none of which are what would really happen if we
had it. Thought is saying our life is imperfect, and that it offers the
way to perfection. This is what ideas/belief systems/schools of thoughts
are always doing: "Life is dirty, plain, coarse, while X is the ultimate
nirvana of bliss and joy", where X might be: wealth, a beautiful woman,
heaven, holiness, etc. All of them, concepts. Our soul cannot live on
concepts. It becomes anemic, starving. In response to which, we are
offered ever better systems of thought to accomplish our needs. See how
the cycle goes?

Without ideas, one cannot indicate where happiness lies. The only truth
is that in the midst of all this, life /is/. Or rather, what we
symbolize by the word "life". So the first task is to abandon concepts
as a substitute for life, while accepting all that life is. I'm
beginning to think this is what Zen calls "enlightenment" -- and that
it's just the beginning.

For it's as though we dwell within an amazingly accurate reproduction of
life inside our minds -- a kind of mental, virtual reality -- except the
reproduction is so lifeless as to be ridiculous! It's like making paper
dolls of all our friends, out of our concepts of them, and then hiding
away in a house to play with them so as to be free from the
inscrutability of real people. We can try so hard to protect ourselves
from the insecurity of life that we cease to live it. Therein lies the
first and greatest cause of unhappiness.

It's even worse when it's not our own system of thought, but those of
family, church, society, because we may not even /like/ the thought
castles we've locked our soul into. Yet still we do it, for the security
it claims to offer in the form of others' approbation.

In order to give up the world of concepts -- this kingdom of names -- we
must love what life is, including all death, pain, sorrow, agony, since
these are no less "life" than pleasure, joy, and bliss. But owing to the
agony of these differences, consciousness shrinks away from the fullness
of life, running away into worlds of the mind where a false hope offers
only joy. This must end in a quality-less stasis, however, since sorrow
is what makes possible the perception of joy.

I think, once we taste of the real bittersweetness of life, we will find
that nothing else is needed to appreciate being alive. How is life ever
lacking? If there is sorrow or pain, it means joy and pleasure are all
the more piquant when next we find them. So perhaps happiness is a
question of the depth of our awareness -- our vision -- and not the
constant changes that ideas favor.
