:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       0E05D984-1BC7-4381-80D9-C1A2C0734A5E
:SLUG:     sitting-with-the-friend
:END:
---
title: Sitting with the Friend
tags: journal
---

As I ponder about God and existence, it becomes harder and harder to
separate the two. In fact, I have a harder time dividing them than I do
seeing them as one. And while I don't think the world is identical with
God (pantheism), I also don't think He exists solely as the Unseen
Beyond. I find a possible answer to this quandary in the following verse
from the Qur'án:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
"He is the First and the Last, the Seen and the Hidden."(57:3)

#+END_QUOTE

Existence, as it appears in any given moment, is the Last, because it
culminates all time before it. However, since each moment is of the same
essential character as every other (i.e., every moment /is/ existence),
they are also all the First. They differ with respect to their identity,
but not in their role or intrinsic quality.

As for the Seen and the Hidden, people offer an easy example. No one can
directly perceive another's soul, because it is Hidden. Science has made
no progress in finding the seat of consciousness, or observing the soul
directly. But this does not mean that no relationship is possible:
through name, face, language, and other means, we can connect to each
other through what may be Seen.

In this sense, existence is God as the Seen, just as much as what people
know of me is me. But since others can never know me as I know myself,
whatever we learn from existence cannot help us to comprehend God's
reality as the Hidden. And although the world is never the same, being
always the Last, I may always apprehend its meaning through its
unchanging aspect as the First.[fn:1]

That said, existence is, in effect, God as I can know Him. Since my
consciousness is of this world, it's as though my whole life I have been
sitting in a room of infinite dimensions, observing a Person mostly
unknown to me -- and every moment being an opportunity to get to know
Him better.

Since His exterior form (the world) is manifold and diverse, it's very
easy to make assumptions. My knowledge is my greatest veil in this case,
because it leads me to assume that I understand. Existence can appear to
me like an oddly-dressed Stranger, so filled with disturbing qualities
that He is more often unwelcome than not. There might be momentary
interest in some elements, but even more repulsion in the others. In
all, life is taken a bit for granted, much of which I have the instinct
to change if I could.

But there He sits, all along, patient and undemanding. Every once in a
while He does something to grab my attention, but most of the time He
leaves me to myself. Although He occupies the whole of my field of
vision, my mind wanders. I look directly at Him, but I stop seeing Him.
I go to other places in my mind, nicer-looking and of my own invention.

But since He is always there, I always have the opportunity to pay
closer attention. To ask more questions. To wonder Who He is, and what
He might have to say. Children are fascinated by life, until they think
they know what it's all about. Who is this bizarre stranger, Life, Who
so rarely makes sense, but is ever full of wonder and new things?

At some point, I might discover this Person to be my true love, and give
over my heart. But to do this requires seeing beyond what my eyes tell
me, because really, He doesn't seem all that glorious. His Essence may
be -- and this most believe -- but His cloak of existence? Too often the
words we hear from Him, spoken in the form of daily events, sound like a
confused and meaningless gibberish.

Those who take the time may gain an inkling of Who this Stranger really
is. We have the whole of our lives to find out. And all it takes is
sincere effort; nothing holds us back but our own indifference, the
belief that true value lies elsewhere. At every moment, every day of my
life, He waits in front of me, ever in plain view. I can't remember ever
having seen anyone else, in fact.

When I pass from this life, perhaps the veil will be lifted, and I will
come to fully recognize Who it is I'd been with. This theme is often
explored in novels and movies, where a powerful king assumes the guise
of a poor man, to visit His subjects and find out what's in their
hearts. And there is always the true-hearted maiden who falls in love
with that seemingly poor man, for his inner qualities, only to find out
later that her betrothed is the king of all the land.

What if existence is the face of our Ideal King, shrouded in radiant
poverty, in order to test who among us is willing to judge by His inward
qualities, and not be distracted by outward appearance? And when death
lifts the veil, the Stranger will remove this strange cloak, and reveal
Himself to be the very perfection we had always sought from life: the
substance of most daring dreams.

And as the maiden who gets to marry the king because she accepted him
for himself, perhaps true heaven is in suddenly realizing that our love
is more beautiful than we could have ever imagined, and we find that we
are now bonded to Him by a trust that others will find very, very long
in coming, after the fact.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
... were the glory of this station to be revealed unto men to an extent
smaller than a needle's eye, thou wouldst witness them gathering before
the threshold of divine mercy and hastening from all sides to the court
of nearness in the realms of divine glory. We have concealed it,
however, as mentioned before, that those who believe may be
distinguished from them that deny, and that those who turn unto God may
be discerned from them that turn aside.[fn:2]

#+END_QUOTE

[fn:1] cf. Bahá'u'lláh, Gems of Divine Mysteries, pp. 34-5

[fn:2] ibid, p. 76
