:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       38DCB2B9-BDCB-4147-808A-92C3CC748168
:SLUG:     reflections-on-the-fast
:END:
---
title: Reflections on the Fast
tags: essays
---

*Provides* a striking contrast to our everyday life which allows us to
observe our accustomed behaviors and discover in what ways we can
improve ourselves.

*Symbolizes* becoming detached spiritually from the things of this
world.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Fasting is a symbol. Fasting signifies abstinence from lust. Physical
fasting is a symbol of that abstinence, and is a reminder; that is, just
as a person abstains from physical appetites, he is to abstain from
self-appetites and self-desires. But mere abstention from food has no
effect on the spirit. It is only a symbol, a reminder. Otherwise it is
of no importance.[fn:1]

Happy is your condition for you have executed the divine command, and
have arisen to fast in these blessed days. For this physical fasting is
a symbol of the spiritual fasting, that is, abstaining from all carnal
desires, becoming characterized with the attributes of the spiritual
ones, attracted to the heavenly fragrances and enkindled with the fire
of the love of God.[fn:2]

#+END_QUOTE

*Weakens* the chains that bind us to the Earth.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
... Whate'er thou doest, Prince! Eating or sacrificing, giving gifts,
Praying or fasting, let it all be done For Me, as Mine. So shalt thou
free thyself From Karmabandh, the chain which holdeth men To good and
evil issue, so shalt come Safe unto Me -- when thou art quit of flesh --
By faith and abdication joined to Me![fn:3]

We have found, [the true philosophers] will say, a path of speculation
which seems to bring us and the argument to the conclusion that while we
are in the body, and while the soul is mingled with this mass of evil,
our desire will not be satisfied, and our desire is of the truth. For
the body is a source of endless trouble to us by reason of the mere
requirement of food; and also is liable to diseases which overtake and
impede us in the search after truth: and by filling us so full of loves,
and lusts, and fears, and fancies, and idols, and every sort of folly,
prevents our ever having, as people say, so much as a thought. For
whence come wars, and fightings, and factions? Whence but from the body
and the lusts of the body? For wars are occasioned by the love of money,
and money has to be acquired for the sake and in the service of the
body; and in consequence of all these things the time which ought to be
given to philosophy is lost. Moreover, if there is time and an
inclination toward philosophy, yet the body introduces a turmoil and
confusion and fear into the course of speculation, and hinders us from
seeing the truth: and all experience shows that if we would have pure
knowledge of anything we must be quit of the body, and the soul in
herself must behold all things in themselves: then I suppose that we
shall attain that which we desire, and of which we say that we are
lovers, and that is wisdom, not while we live, but after death, as the
argument shows; for if while in company with the body the soul cannot
have pure knowledge, one of two things seems to follow -- either
knowledge is not to be attained at all, or, if at all, after death. For
then, and not till then, the soul will be in herself alone and without
the body. In this present life, I reckon that we make the nearest
approach to knowledge when we have the least possible concern or
interest in the body, and are not saturated with the bodily nature, but
remain pure until the hour when God himself is pleased to release us.
And then the foolishness of the body will be cleared away and we shall
be pure and hold converse with other pure souls, and know of ourselves
the clear light everywhere; and this is surely the light of truth. For
no impure thing is allowed to approach the pure. These are the sort of
words, Simmias, which the true lovers of wisdom cannot help saying to
one another, and thinking....

And what is purification but the separation of the soul from the body,
as I was saying before; the habit of the soul gathering and collecting
herself into herself, out of all the courses of the body; the dwelling
in her own place alone, as in another life, so also in this, as far as
she can: the release of the soul from the chains of the body....[fn:4]

#+END_QUOTE

*Can be* a form of healing.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
There is but one power which heals -- that is God. The state or
condition through which the healing takes place is the confidence of the
heart. By some this state is reached through pills, powders, and
physicians. By others through hygiene, fasting, and prayer. By others
through direct perception.[fn:5]

#+END_QUOTE

*Is a* kind of personal communion with God.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Moreover when ye fast, be not, as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance:
for they disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast.
Verily I say unto you, they have their reward. But thou, when thou
fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy face; that thou appear not unto
men to fast, but unto thy Father which is in secret: and thy Father,
which seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly.[fn:6]

#+END_QUOTE

*Teaches* self-restraint.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
O ye who believe! Fasting is prescribed to you as it was prescribed to
those before you, that ye may (learn) self-restraint...[fn:7]

#+END_QUOTE

*Conduces* to mindfulness, and the awakening of consciousness.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Besides all this, prayer and fasting is the cause of awakening and
mindfulness and conducive to protection and preservation from
tests...[fn:8]

#+END_QUOTE

*Demonstrates* our eagerness to progress along the Straight Path.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Therefore also now, saith the LORD, turn ye even to me with all your
heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning...[fn:9]

My last request is that you permit no one henceforth to enter my
chamber. From now until the time when I shall be summoned to leave this
house, let no one be allowed to disturb my devotions. This day I intend
to fast -- a fast which I shall not break until I am brought face to
face with my Beloved.[fn:10]

/Táhirih's last words to the wife of Kalantar, who was looking after
her:/

Mullá
=Alí hastened to his companions and acquainted them with the nature of his conversation with Mullá Husayn.  Ablaze with the fire which the account of that conversation had kindled in their hearts, they immediately dispersed, and, seeking the seclusion of their cells, besought, through fasting and prayer, the early removal of the veil that intervened between them and the recognition of their Beloved. They prayed while keeping their vigils:=O
God, our God! Thee only do we worship, and to Thee do we cry for help.
Guide us, we beseech Thee, on the straight Path, O Lord our God! Fulfill
what Thou hast promised unto us by Thine Apostles, and put us not to
shame on the Day of Resurrection. Verily, Thou wilt not break Thy
promise.'[fn:11]

#+END_QUOTE

*Is a* form of humbling our will before the Will of God.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
But as for me, when they were sick, my clothing was sackcloth: I humbled
my soul with fasting; and my prayer returned into mine own bosom.[fn:12]

#+END_QUOTE

*Might be* considered as a period of spiritual "gestation" before
re-entering the affairs of the world; such as it was common for the
Manifestations and others (e.g., Shoghi Effendi) to withdraw from the
world for a time before embarking on their missions.

*Is a* time of mourning the absence of our Beloved.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Then came to him the disciples of John, saying, Why do we and the
Pharisees fast oft, but thy disciples fast not? And Jesus said unto
them, Can the children of the bridechamber mourn, as long as the
bridegroom is with them? but the days will come, when the bridegroom
shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast.[fn:13]

#+END_QUOTE

*Is a way of relating* to the experiences of our Beloved. (I apologize,
but I don't have this reference with me; it is from the book "Fasting: A
Bahá'í Handbook", where `Abdu'l-Bahá talks about the wisdom of fasting).

*Establishes* a kind of silence in our lives, which betters our inward
hearing.

*Is the Sun* of religion...

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
And as the sun and moon constitute the brightest and most prominent
luminaries in the heavens, similarly in the heaven of the religion of
God two shining orbs have been ordained -- fasting and prayer. `Islam is
heaven; fasting is its sun, prayer, its moon.[fn:14]

#+END_QUOTE

*Impresses* upon the believer, in a more moderate way, what asceticism
would hope to achieve.

*Introduces* us to a way of life which is different from the ways of
this world.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou seest not? Wherefore have
we afflicted our soul, and thou takest no knowledge? Behold, in the day
of your fast ye find pleasure, and exact all your labours. Behold, ye
fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness: ye
shall not fast as ye do this day, to make your voice to be heard on
high. Is it such a fast that I have chosen? A day for a man to afflict
his soul? Is it to bow down his head as a bulrush, and to spread
sackcloth and ashes under him? Wilt thou call this a fast, and an
acceptable day to the *Lord*? Is not this the fast that I have chosen?
To loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let
the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal
thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out
to thy house? When thou seest the naked, that thou cover him; and that
thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh? Then shall thy light break
forth as the morning, and thine health shall spring forth speedily: and
thy righteousness shall go before thee; the glory of the *Lord* shall be
thy reward.[fn:15]

#+END_QUOTE

*Sharpens* the distinction between that part of us which is carnal, and
that which is divine.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Likewise, reflect upon the perfection of man's creation, and that all
these planes and states are folded up and hidden away within him.

Dost thou reckon thyself only a puny form When within thee the universe
is folded?

Then we must labor to destroy the animal condition, till the meaning of
humanity shall come to light.[fn:16]

#+END_QUOTE

*By removing* the most immediate forms of self-gratification, it gives
us pause to consider exactly what this world has to offer. For example,
perhaps we are like a drowsy bird asleep in his cage. Each time we come
close to wakening, and hence to realizing the horror of our
imprisonment, we are lulled to sleep by the complacency of material
satisfaction. By removing the narcotic effect of material balsams, in a
sense, we permit the mist to clear, and waken to the realization of our
own selves.

*Empowers us*, by demonstrating quite palpably that our will is capable
of overcoming our physical concupiscence.

*Offers a view* of the world, and a state of mind, which, like prayer,
is unique among the experiences of life. In what other avenue of life do
we experience the same feelings as we do when we're fasting? It
introduces us to a way of living that is not common, and thus implies
that the ordinary mode of survival is not the only kind of life there
is.

*Makes very real* to us the influence our physical lust has over our
wills, and how much of our daily plans are devoted to material
considerations.

*Like prayer*, it is a very real, concrete sensation, and so can become
a powerful focal point of meditation. Mere ideas have a chance to become
forgotten, but physical experiences obtrude on our consciousness.

*Causes us to be grateful* that it lasts for only a fixed time! And thus
we realize God's mercy, and the Hidden Word:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
O Son of Being! If poverty overtake thee, be not sad; for in time the
Lord of wealth shall visit thee. Fear not abasement, for glory shall one
day rest on thee.[fn:17]

#+END_QUOTE

That is, the fact that we are permitted to break the fast is perhaps
symbolic that times of deprivation will always be followed by reunion.

*Increases our awareness* of the sufferings of others; not only their
material privations, but their lack of familiarity with the Beloved.
After all, a condition of thirst and hunger describes the situation of
someone who has not yet been introduced to the Table of Bounty. In this
way, it may underscore the primary role of teaching in our service to
the world.

*Reminds us* that the spiritual life requires attention and effort, and
that if instead we relax ourselves entirely, we shall sink inescapably
into oblivion.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Ye are even as the bird which soareth, with the full force of its mighty
wings and with complete and joyous confidence, through the immensity of
the heavens, until, impelled to satisfy its hunger, it turneth longingly
to the water and clay of the earth below it, and, having been entrapped
in the mesh of its desire, findeth itself impotent to resume its flight
to the realms whence it came. Powerless to shake off the burden weighing
on its sullied wings, that bird, hitherto an inmate of the heavens, is
now forced to seek a dwelling-place upon the dust. Wherefore, O My
servants, defile not your wings with the clay of waywardness and vain
desires, and suffer them not to be stained with the dust of envy and
hate, that ye may not be hindered from soaring in the heavens of My
divine knowledge.[fn:18]

#+END_QUOTE

*Underscores the fact* that true growth requires a certain degree of
pain, while the rewards far outweigh the cost! We should pursue our
spiritual course with alacrity, even if at times the flesh may be
unwilling.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
The steed of this Valley is pain; and if there be no pain this journey
will never end. In this station the lover hath no thought save the
Beloved, and seeketh no refuge save the Friend. At every moment he
offereth a hundred lives in the path of the Loved One, at every step he
throweth a thousand heads at the feet of the Beloved.

O My Brother! Until thou enter the Egypt of love, thou shalt never come
to the Joseph of the Beauty of the Friend; and until, like Jacob, thou
forsake thine outward eyes, thou shalt never open the eye of thine
inward being; and until thou burn with the fire of love, thou shalt
never commune with the Lover of Longing.[fn:19]

#+END_QUOTE

*Causes those with means* to understand the suffering of the destitute:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
All praise be unto God, Who hath revealed the law of obligatory prayer
as a reminder to His servants, and enjoined on them the Fast that those
possessed of means may become apprised of the owes and sufferings of the
destitute.[fn:20]

#+END_QUOTE

*It leaves us* with nothing to suffice us but God.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Rid thou thyself of all attachments to aught except God, enrich thyself
in God by dispensing with all else besides Him, and recite this prayer:

Say: God sufficeth all things above all things, and nothing in the
heavens or in the earth or in whatever lieth between them but God, thy
Lord, sufficeth. Verily, He is in Himself the Knower, the Sustainer, the
Omnipotent.

Regard not the all-sufficing power of God as an idle fancy. It is that
genuine faith which thou cherishest for the Manifestation of God in
every Dispensation. It is such faith which sufficeth above all the
things that exist on the earth, whereas no created thing on earth
besides faith would suffice thee. If thou art not a believer, the Tree
of divine Truth would condemn thee to extinction. If thou art a
believer, thy faith shall be sufficient for thee above all things that
exist on earth, even though thou possess nothing.[fn:21]

#+END_QUOTE

*During the time of fasting*, the spiritual takes on the ascendant in
our lives; in this way it may symbolize the "Divine Springtime": the
period of the Manifestation's presence amongst us. The force of that
Presence perpetuates throughout the rest of His Cycle, but the time of
its Dawning is especially blessed. The fast perhaps is a symbolic
remembrance of that time, and hence our joy and our desire to spend time
with Him would outweigh all material considerations.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
O My friend, listen with heart and soul to the songs of the spirit, and
treasure them as thine own eyes. For the heavenly wisdoms, like the
clouds of spring, will not rain down on the earth of men's hearts
forever; and though the grace of the All-Bounteous One is never stilled
and never ceasing, yet to each time and era a portion is allotted and a
bounty set apart, this in a given measure. 'And no one thing is there,
but with Us are its storehouses; and We send it not down but in settled
measure.' The cloud of the Loved One's mercy raineth only on the garden
of the spirit, and bestoweth this bounty only in the season of spring.
The other seasons have no share in this greatest grace, and barren lands
no portion of this favor.[fn:22]

O Son of Justice! Whither can a lover go but to the land of his beloved?
and what seeker findeth rest away from his heart's desire? To the true
lover reunion is life, and separation is death. His breast is void of
patience and his heart hath no peace. A myriad lives he would forsake to
hasten to the abode of his beloved.[fn:23]

Consider these nightingales. So great is their love for these roses,
that sleepless from dusk till dawn, they warble their melodies and
commune with burning passion with the object of their adoration. How
then can those who claim to be afire with the rose-like beauty of the
Beloved choose to sleep?[fn:24]

#+END_QUOTE

[fn:1] Esselmont, Bahá'u'lláh and the New Era, p. 171

[fn:2] =Abdu'l-Bahá, Tablets of=Abdu'l-Bahá, p. 40

[fn:3] Bhagavad-Gita, chapter 9

[fn:4] Plato, from the Phaedo

[fn:5] =Abdu'l-Bahá,=Abdu'l-Bahá in London, p. 95

[fn:6] New Testament, Matthew, 6:16-18

[fn:7] Qur'án, 2:183

[fn:8] Bahá'í World Faith, p. 368

[fn:9] Bible, Joel 2:12

[fn:10] Nabil, The Dawn-Breakers, p. 623

[fn:11] Nabíl, The Dawn-Breakers, p. 68

[fn:12] Bible, Psalms 35:13

[fn:13] Bible, Matthew 9:14-15

[fn:14] Bahá'u'lláh, Kitáb-i-Íqán, p. 40

[fn:15] Bible, Isaiah 58:3-8

[fn:16] Bahá'u'lláh, The Seven Valleys, p. 34

[fn:17] Bahá'u'lláh, The Hidden Words, Arabic 53

[fn:18] Gleanings from the Writings of Bahá'u'lláh, p. 327

[fn:19] Bahá'u'lláh, The Seven Valleys, pp. 8-9

[fn:20] Bahá'u'lláh, from the compilation on Obligatory Prayer and
        Fasting

[fn:21] Báb, Selections from the Writings of, p. 123

[fn:22] Bahá'u'lláh, The Seven Valleys, p. 38

[fn:23] Bahá'u'lláh, The Hidden Words, p. 23

[fn:24] Bahá'u'lláh, quoted in God Passes By, p. 153
