:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       5B318979-659D-4B24-9807-C9375784D94D
:SLUG:     fate
:END:
#+filetags: :journal:
#+title: Fate

I tend to think that we have enough freedom to express our spirit, but
not enough to go against the plan of God. That is, He may have fixed
certain details of our lives -- gender, innate ability, country,
culture, etc. -- but what we do with these things is up to us. We all
have to die at some point, but the real question is: how will we live?

Fate explains to me why certain people are excellent at some things, and
others aren't. There are musicians, for example, who can work magic with
their instruments. By studying, I'm sure I could become pretty good, but
those people just seem to have a natural "talent" which puts them much
further ahead than I will ever reach.

I would say that such people are "fated" with their talent. The question
now is: how will they use it? Each person has a different fate, but the
task put to all is the same. How we train our heart, and express it
within our fate, is the key.

This would mean that there is always /enough/ choice to reveal our true
spirit, but not enough to alter God's plan. It's a bit like your school
situation: You can only choose from a limited number of courses, majors,
and degrees. Your heart's desire is to serve humanity. So it falls upon
your freedom of will to choose how you will fulfill that desire given
your constraints.

Isn't all artistic expression the result of the artist going beyond the
limitations of his medium? Perhaps fate is the soul's medium, so that it
too can express the beauty of its nature.
