:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       FF9DCDA3-32AC-441E-86CD-023A62E1B4E9
:SLUG:     commentary-the-soul-of-rebellion
:END:
---
title: "Commentary: The soul of rebellion"
tags: journal
---

Someone asked recently what the inspiration was behind the poem
"[[file:soul.of.rebellion][The soul of rebellion]]":

I had been pondering the reality of love for the past six months or so.
I began to see that as love grows, it encompasses everything --
absolutely everything! It has no taint of hatred, which is the spirit of
rejecting or pushing things away (at least, not in the heart, since
sometimes love requires actions that appear similar to rejection).

If this is so, then ultimately Love must embrace even Hatred, and be
able to see what is lovable about it. This is when it discovers that
Love's response to Hatred is its ultimate proof. In fact, without
Hatred, Love would not be tested and would not be known as a reality.
That is, if there were no Hatred, Love would simply be the law of things
and there would be no consciousness of it at all.

At the moment I realized that all my loathing of my dark side /was my
dark side/. It was not my light side hating my dark, but was the dark
itself. My light side only loves -- and loves the dark side. And so I
imagined myself descending into my inner hell, and embracing my brother
Satan, who works for me in mysterious ways that only Love can
appreciate. It's my limitations that create the distinction between Love
and Hate, when in reality they are partners of a single Truth. Through
the dynamic of their interaction, God becomes known in a conscious and
palpable way.

Once I came to love my dark side -- whose destruction helps clear away
old thought, whose fury is a source of strength, whose impatience saves
me from complacency -- I realized there is /nothing/ about my creation
that I dislike. I am perfect: even my flaws are perfect. I am just as
God made me. It is what I choose to do with this perfect being that
brings me either joy or sorrow. When I focus on Him, I am happy; when I
turn away from Him, I am sad. But as for me, myself, there is nothing
that needs to be added or taken away. Only used.

And so, it was "I" who placed my light side in heaven, and my dark side
in hell, and drew the boundary between them. Once this tyranny is
undone, then all parts will be recipients of the same Light. His Light
shines on high and low alike. Every part of me was designed to the end
of knowing and worshiping God.
