:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       AAC92FDC-2B8E-4CA7-BE58-0CF1B2422B93
:SLUG:     questioning-sin
:END:
---
title: Questioning "sin"
tags: journal
---

In the original Hebrew the meaning of sin was "to miss the mark": to not
fulfill what was meant to be, to lose an opportunity. Yet I hear sin
used more often in relation to the attractive things of the world, such
as calling chocolate "sinful". The same is said for places where
beautiful people wear little clothing, or if the environment is too
pleasant, etc.

I can understand why moralists would frown on things if their morals are
against it. There are food moralists, for example, who are against
chocolate and the refined sugar it contains. But why call it sinful?
Even if it tempts people away from a rigid obedience, how does this
cause a person to "miss the mark"?

Maybe in these cases the mark is the standard itself, making "sinful"
whatever causes a person to fall short of that standard. However, this
makes sense only if the standard is the goal. If the standard is only a
means to an end, "missing the mark" is missing the end which that
morality is helping us to reach. For a food moralist whose objective is
health, a sin is not what violates their regimen, but what detracts from
health: if they have an opportunity to achieve enduring health, but do
things that go against the goal, they will have "missed the mark". Thus
if one chooses a morality appropriate to a certain goal, "sin" is
whatever harms that goal -- most likely from violating the morality
intended to achieve it.

Consider the goal of happiness -- assuming there exists a morality to
take us there. A sin would then be whatever makes us unhappy. How
different from the idea that the things we enjoy should make us feel
ashamed because they are "sinful"! Either it is sinful because it makes
us unhappy (and not the other way around) or it makes us happy and we
call it sinful because we have another goal in mind -- such as
contrasting present good with future good.

The moment of discernment should be the instant of sadness, or when the
goal is lost. As despair begins, I think, "I've sinned somehow", because
I've missed the mark I was aiming for. When I feel elated, the opposite
thought comes to mind. Or if something makes me feel good that later
provokes more pain than its joy, intellectually I remove time and
recognize that what'd appeared helpful to my goal was actually harming
it.

To move this to the religious degree, I assume from Scripture that
everything I see around me, including my own soul, has been created to a
purpose. To sin in this context is to fail to reach that purpose. Since
man is the only element I'm aware of that has free agency, only man can
make a choice which could be called sinful -- since all other parts of
reality have been determined to play their part.

If a man can sin by failing to reach his appointed level in this scheme,
it begs the question: why should we care? Teleology is well and good,
but does it indicate anything we can actually benefit from? Here I would
say that fulfillment and happiness are both of a kind, being justified
in their condition by the condition itself. To miss the mark is to miss
out on something that could have been achieved, the loss of which is
felt only once we become conscious of what was lost.

The misuse of our being's capacity, then, is the religious meaning of
sin. We were created to a certain end, but we can "miss" that end
through negligence. A man sins who does not make the best use of himself
and the time he's been given -- not simply the one who avoids the
conditions leading to sin. Sinfulness is a failure to engage ourselves
fully in the process of creation.

What that process is, and how we fit into it, is so individual I don't
think anyone can knowingly say if another is sinning or not. The
knowledge of our purpose is so far beyond words that this, I believe, is
where morality establishes itself: as a guideline to use in place of
knowledge. To the degree that we can trust the guideline to assist our
reality, we can say that failing the guideline is a sin. Here we have
the contemporary usage of the term: to describe things that might cause
us to fail in faithfulness to our goal. But the nomenclature of sin
these days has become very indirect, and has taken on the sense of an
adjective when properly it should be only a verb.
