:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       1BBA562E-EFC4-4EB0-B617-1F5B00D6C8C9
:SLUG:     a-different-reality
:END:
---
title: A different reality
tags: journal
---

I woke up this morning from a very powerful dream; the feeling of it is
still with me. In its details it was rather simple, but in its feeling
and meaning it was very profound for me.

I had somehow come to a complete understanding that human souls are
granted by God the freedom to experience whatever reality they most
believe in. This took particular forms in the dream, but in the
clearest, I was seated in an empty, white room, eating a phone book. A
co-worker stepped in to wonder what I was doing, but I had no way to
explain that for me, the room had everything in it I could ever want,
and that the phonebook was actually a very tasty lasagna.

Later when I thought about this it occurred to me that a phone book, of
sorts, represents an particular ideal of knowledge: a single book that's
a compendium of irrefutable factual knowledge, well organized. Meanwhile
I was eating this book as if it were a tasty meal. This brought the
following quote to mind:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Although to outward view, the wayfarers in this Valley may dwell upon
the dust, yet inwardly they are throned in the heights of mystic
meaning; they eat of the endless bounties of inner significances, and
drink of the delicate wines of the spirit.

#+END_QUOTE

In another scene, I was driving on the freeway, which was filled with
traffic, yet I was somehow feeling the most intense peace and joy to be
alive and experiencing such a place. I wondered, "What if hell is our
real home and this life is just a respite? That would completely alter
how we experience existence here." That is, we seem to want something so
much better; what if this life is actually fantastic, and we miss out on
that reality because we believe in something else?

At the end of the dream I was trying to tell a group of people this,
even lifting myself into the air to shock them into accepting the
possibility that things might be other than they seem. I remember saying
to the group: "Our culture has so completely determined the life we
experience, we can't even separate what we've been told from what we
know ourselves. Imagine if the basis of all our understanding begins
with the number two. No matter how much we add to that foundation, we
will never comprehend unity. We need to subtract from what we started
with to achieve that understanding. We've been set up in such a way that
Truth is simply not perceptible."

Then the dream ended and I felt as if anything were possible provided I
truly believed in it. It might appear one way to those who see me, but
/how I experience it/ is something completely up to me.
