:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       35EDA599-FCC7-4DC0-A31F-C4F637CD97A5
:SLUG:     cultural-interpretations
:END:
#+filetags: :journal:
#+title: Cultural interpretations

While reading further in one of my favorite books today, /Decline and
Fall of the Roman Empire/ (which takes a bit of getting used to, but is
worthwhile after that), I came across a discussion of some early ideas
about the divinity of Jesus Christ. What was so interesting about them
is how the doctrine of the trinity was almost forced based on prevailing
assumptions about the nature of the world.

For example, it was a strongly held notion around that time that divine
substance (the quintessence) was something indivisible, perfect and
beyond corruption. Anything divine was of the quintessence, such as
soul, heaven, etc. Alchemy was a science devoted to discovering the
relationship of quintessence to ordinary items, thus enabling the
scientist to convert them to any other form, heal the material substance
of the body, and live eternally young.

Now, based on the idea that divine things are of quintessence, it was
impossible for thinkers to conceive that Christ could be both divine and
yet of human form. They believed Christ had come from heaven (and
returned to it), but they sought a model to allow for a visitation
within the physical world of One who must have been a living form of the
quintessence -- otherwise His divine nature would be in question.

It is surprising how many theories evolved from the single necessity of
requiring that Christ not be of common flesh in order rationally to
accept His divine nature. A first group asserted that He never had
physical form at all, but was an optical/auditory illusion who simply
bore the appearance of a human being. In this way the Divine visited
humanity without becoming "corrupted" by intermingling Its substance
with the four elements.

Another group believed that Christ was in fact human, with the Holy
Spirit being the real divine agency. It visited Jesus of Nazareth at the
time of His baptism -- which allows for His being an ordinary human
being during birth and childhood, a very messy consideration (e.g., how
could the Son of God have come through a woman's vagina to enter this
world?) -- and left Him during His trials on the cross, immediately
before His seeming exclamation of despair. This model invoked a dual
nature to Christ which again permitted the Divine to visit humanity
without the taint of mortal corruption.

Later this dual model evolved into a triune one, afterwards confounded
as a unity to avoid the obvious problem that quintessence must be
indivisible. But I still have more to read on that development...

What interested me is how strong the basic assumptions were -- of the
nature of things, and how mortal substance could not become the carrier
of divinity because of its corruptible essence -- and how these
assumptions forced religious thinking down certain avenues in order to
reach a compromise between what was believed about the world and what
people had come to believe about Christ from His teachings.

Then what about the assumptions we have of the world today? In what ways
is the same thing is happening now as then: the invisible bending of
religious interpretations toward a believable model based on the context
of our world-view. How we see things seems to put a range to the truths
we can accept -- those which fit the model somehow. Are there
assumptions we hold of mortality and selfhood that run so deep, our view
of God is not so much a form of truth as an inverted picture of how we
see ourselves?
