:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       9BC7E38D-7CE3-4E90-8D98-42BEF9AA25D1
:SLUG:     competition-and-spirituality
:END:
---
title: Competition and spirituality
tags: journal
---

One of the fundamental principles of material life is limitation -- in
particular the limits of our faculties and the resources they act upon.
For example, we can live for only so long without food, and there is
only so much food to be had in the world. Nothing is without limit; not
even the whole universe could satisify an unlimited number of people who
all wanted the same thing.

In society, positions and luxuries are even more limited than the basic
necessities of food and water. Many people want to become doctors, for
instance, but universities and medical schools have only so many
openings available. Many may dream of a sports car, or a mansion by the
sea, or just a warm house with a healthy family; but the fact is, not
everyone who dreams of a thing can have it. It's only those who work
hard, or have some natural, cultural or social advantage, that can gain
access to the limited number of rewards available.

As a result of this fact of life, children are brought up with a sense
of the critical importance of education to their future happiness. There
are advertisements on television telling them that high school dropouts
make less money than those who go to college; only the best grades can
get a student into Ivy-league schools; a diploma is the only sure way to
reserve a spot in the coveted echelons of white-collar society. Success
is very much tied to our ability to secure for ourselves a place in the
ever-dwindling real estate of luxury. The rest is the lot of the common
man, who must toil until the end of his days "just to make ends meet".

Since this is a reality of social life, we are faced with it almost from
day one. We can hardly rest for the sense that others might snatch up
the opportunities if we let them pass by. First, we must do well in
primary school, then on to high school and deciding a major, then
fighting our way into a good college and a prestigious program, then to
find a young, pretty wife or husband before "all the good ones are
taken", then a job in competitive markets that never seem to have enough
positions, then a house in a good neighborhood before housing prices go
through the roof, etc., etc. We are racing to beat out others who might
find the better deals before us. Not being content with second or third
place is a frequent subject of books and movies.

In such an atmosphere, it's no wonder that we continue this image of
life into the next world. Nowhere is it written that heaven has limited
real-estate, yet I remember at least one Christian movie that described
a "well of souls" -- where the souls of babies come from -- that will
run dry with the coming of the Last Days.

Driven by our sense of competition, Heaven is imagined as a place that
only the holiest, most devout may reach. It's almost an exact comparison
between attending school to find a good job, and "working on our
virtues" to secure a place in paradise.

But is this an aspect of spirituality /at all/? If I were to discuss
heaven with a farmer from the slopes of Costa Rica, what would he
imagine? Maybe a place where crops never fail, and grow without toil;
but would it be as colored by the sense that not everyone may experience
it?

Or take prayer as another example. When I talk to my friends about their
concerns and ask if they've prayed about it, some say they do. Then they
express the hope that God will hear their prayer -- as if maybe He
doesn't have enough ears for everyone. /But why wouldn't He hear us?/
Does He have a limited attention span? Does He allocate assistance only
to a certain number before it runs out? If a person thinks he or she is
"not good enough" for God to hear their prayer, my response is, "Good
enough for what?" To make the grade? To beat out others who are praying
on the same day? To say it loudly enough for God's ears to pick up the
cry?

As far as I've read, God and heaven are utterly without limitation or
end; these are primary factors distinguishing Them from our present
reality. If this is the case, wouldn't it imply a fundamentally
different economy from what we experience here? Yet our upbringing has
presented such a concrete sense of what life's about that I think we
project this understanding forward, as if what's coming next is just an
colorful extension of what we've already known.

Assuming for a moment that God and heaven have no constraints, what does
that imply? Well, it means that God can do anything whatsoever, for one
thing. I remember one day talking with a friend, and I proposed the idea
that God might wilfully govern the movement of sub-atomic particles,
thereby continually expressing His will through the medium of creation
and assuring that at each moment all things work out for the ultimate
best. My friend was shocked at the implication that God would waste His
time on such mundanity. He preferred a model where God had designed the
world so perfectly that He simply "turned the key" at the beginning, and
since then we've been operating on natural laws and principles, freeing
the Creator from having constantly to watch over it.

This is actually a fairly common idea of creation, but it begs the
question: What could it possibly mean for God to waste His time? Does He
really have only a fixed quantity of it, such that by misusing it He
would waste it? Is His attention span so limited that watching every
atom would have an impact on the infinite span of His mind?

Consider an example: You have a thousand dollars. A friend comes up to
you and says he needs eight hundred dollars to satisfy a debt. But
giving him eighty percent of what you have leaves you with very little
to work with. It means you can't really do much with the money you had
hoped to spend on other things. Maybe you say yes, maybe you don't, but
certainly you will feel the loss.

Now imagine you have about two hundred billion dollars. This is enough
money that if you blew five million dollars a day, every day for a
century, you still wouldn't finish spending it all. Now your friend asks
you for eight hundred dollars again. Would you even notice it among the
five million others you spend each day?

If you can, project this to trillions, quadrillions, to absolutely
ridiculous sums of money. At a certain point, you could give a billion
dollars to every baby who would ever be born, until the expiration of
the Sun, and still it wouldn't dent your pocket-book. These are absurd,
practically useless riches, they've become so large.

Now consider that this isn't even an atom within a drop within one of
the countless oceans of Infinity. If God commands resources of this
kind, the concept of "resources" flies out the window; it becomes
laughable to imagine that God doesn't have the time to personally and
fully attend to the concerns of every individual who has ever been. He
could watch over the movements of every atom of billions of universes,
and it would be less for Him than it is for us to laugh at a small joke.

The idea of competition belongs to this world. I don't believe there are
a limited number of spots in heaven, or to God's attention. I doubt even
there really exist highs and lows where infinity is concerned. If the
Writings of God talk about gradations of heaven, perhaps it refers to
gradations in our capacity to accept and perceive them, than to any real
separations in such a place.

In fact, I think Heaven is going to be the biggest culture shock of all!
I mean, what if gold were unlimited in this world? It would suddenly
lose all its value. We prize what is rare, and have developed a society
around the acquisition and accomplishment of things that not everyone
can do. Within Infinity, value must be based on something far different
than rarity.

All of this is one result of a cultural upbringing that focuses us so
much onto a path of progress and ascent. It's what we're about, and what
moves the engine of Western civilization. So we imagine an after-life
that is essentially an extension of the same thing in its underpinnings.
But it is divine. What this truly means is something I think none of us
can accurately perceive yet.
