:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       44F6137F-6159-4928-8BFD-51DCF69E31D5
:SLUG:     short-man-and-long-man
:END:
#+filetags: :journal:
#+title: Short man and long man

This theory has been part of my thinking since it first occurred to me
several years ago. As I remember, it happened while I was still working
a regular job. Back then I was very interested in planning and how to
arrange my life to be most effective (which is still an interest -- just
not in the detailed fashion of before).

As I sat and made my daily plans, I saw very clearly what I intended to
happen each day. The days were part of a progressive plan that moved
from month to month, ostensibly toward some specific goal.

What I noticed, however, is that my life -- as seen from month to month
-- betrayed a very different character from what my planning led me to
think. I /knew/ who I was, and the choices I was making day to day, but
somehow another creature was appearing between the lines: a personality
who lived only from month to month.

This concrete, well-defined, daily me became my Short Man -- the person
I see over short time-scales; the other is my Long Man, who strides
across the years. Sometimes they are very different, having opposite
goals and means; other times they are harmonized and we work together.

Have you ever noticed how sometimes you do things without explanation?
An impulsive word or deed, a sudden change of plans, an inspiration
following from a dream or a sudden moment. This is how the Long Man
acts; he slips between the moments of our otherwise ordered lives. Nor
is he easily put off. You can deny his existence altogether, but he
still finds ways of accomplishing his ends.

At times the Long Man has scared me to death. Do I want what he wants?
Why is he moving me down a certain road? /Who does his thinking/? Other
times he's given me a sense of security, because although I have no idea
how I will achieve certain things, if the Long Man wants it also, I can
be pretty sure it will eventually happen.

Nor is the Long Man necessarily a moralist like my Shorter self. He
seems to play out a deeper life of the heart, which may go against what
I believe to be right. Other times he will stop me -- in the end -- from
denying what I truly believe in. He is neither good nor evil, just
inexorably true to my heart.

Lately I have even begun to think there are many Long Men: one who walks
the months and years, another who passes slowly through the stages of my
life, and another who encompasses the whole and whom I might call
Destiny. And beyond these, there might be another who spans a greater
whole -- my part in the zeitgeist of mankind -- and yet another who
expresses the most basic desires of my species. I even wonder if it does
not continue, until I would find that my Longest Man, the Infinite Man,
is none other than the role I play in God's Being.

To see the Long Man in action requires either keeping a long diary, or
having a good memory and enjoying self-reflection. I first noticed the
Long Man when I started seeing certain things coming to fruition in my
life, mostly regarding career and relationships. I realized that these
changes were complex, and required too much "planning" to have simply
happened of themselves. There are times when one can even sense the Long
Man in another person, which prompts us to feel like we know what the
flavor of their future will be, despite what they imagine for
themselves.

Both Long and Short Men seem to express facets of one personality with
many strata. They are only incompatible if there is doubt and conflict
in the individual. A harmonized mind (in my experience) tends to move in
a more synchronized fashion, as if we possess the capacity for
multi-level, simultaneous thinking spanning multiple time frames. It's
amazing to me that the Long Men "think", but they do seem to express a
coherent intent. This is a side of myself I have wanted to cultivate and
enlist the help of, because some of my desired personal changes are
daunting to the Short Man Alone. To harness the power of all our
dimensions would allow us to grasp for futures which deny immediate
comprehension.

Then one day I was reading a book by Greg Egan titled /Quarantine/, in
which he played with the idea of human's control over the function of
quantum coherence in the observed universe. He suggested that life
naturally exists in a state of superposition (cf., the movie "What the
Bleep do we Know?"), but that humanity possesses a unique capacity to
collapse these states based on our intention. For this reason, the rest
of the beings in the universe quarantine us, so that our particular
biases and prejudices are not allowed to decide what the rest of the
universe will look like.

The main character in the book is surgically altered to be able to
exists in a natural state of superposition, only causing a collapse when
he consciously chooses. In this way, for example, he is able to open
combination locks by trying every possible combination simultaneously,
and "collapsing" the desired result. But, he wonders, who chooses what
is "desired"? He is separately conscious -- through superposition -- in
every one of these possible states. In all but one state he experiences
frustration and failure, while in that chosen state he knows success.
What troubles him is that there must be another entity, a state of unity
higher than all the separate states, who chooses the outcome most
profitable to the whole. This "super identity" exists beyond nature,
beyond superposition, expressing its desires through the choice of which
superimposed state to collapse.

This sounded an awful lot like the Long Man I was experiencing! The
Short Man always looks at immediate details, while the Long Man seems to
choose which /set/ of details his counterpart will face. Are we at each
moment presented with a multitude of possible futures, our Short Men
confronting them all, while a deeper aspect to our being -- beyond place
and time - decides which of these is incorporated into our realized
future?

Perhaps there are even Shorter Men than the immediate will: the
decisions of my organs, cells, part of cells -- even molecules. Looked
at this way, I see myself more as a pan-dimensional being, my feet in
the raw stuff of my body and surroundings, with my head and heart
reaching up through levels I can barely visualize. At this point,
thinking of "I" is like taking a slice through a being who crosses
multiple potential realities. Is the function of my soul a cohering
aspect of Infinity to bring out Its colors and flavors? Is my "self"
just the experience of witnessing that effect?
