:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       F5182B76-EE5E-4FB9-8EBD-8EE29BFA3269
:SLUG:     culture-and-thought
:END:
---
title: Culture and thought
tags: journal
---

Lately I have been thinking a lot about culture and how our cultural
upbringing dominates our interpretations of very basic things. Where
this interests me most is in how it affects our understanding of
spirituality and our relationship to the world of the unseen and to God.

One historical figure who keenly appreciated this was Socrates. As the
story goes, one day a person went to visit the oracle at Delphi. He
asked the oracle if there was any man in the world wiser than Socrates
(who was probably well known for his witty discussion and his humor by
that time). The oracle responded, "No". So the man went to Socrates and
told him what the oracle had said, at which Socrates was shocked. How
could it be me? he thought. To test the truth of the oracle's
pronouncement he went around asking people difficult questions about
profound topics, to see if their answers were better than his, or if he
really was the wisest man alive.

This caused Socrates, for example, to go up to a lawyer and ask him,
"What is justice?", or ask teachers what knowledge was, or the
philosophers of the time (the sophists) what wisdom was. Each time they
gave their answers, Socrates would consider it and probe its
implications. Over the course of their discussion they would invariably
be forced to refine their answers as Socrates found more and more cases
where not only did they not apply, but they had contradicted themselves.
Finally each person gave up in frustration, claiming that Socrates was
merely playing with words, or tricking them into saying things they
didn't mean. "It's obvious what Justice is and everyone knows it,
there's no reason to ask such questions!", was a typical reply.

What Socrates discovered is that no one really knew what they were
saying, they just repeated what everyone else had said about it. In the
end, he decided that what the oracle really meant when she claimed him
to be the wisest man is that no one was truly wise, and only in
recognizing this could wisdom begin. Everything the people held as
obvious and true about life was based on a set of cultural assumptions
that most people left unquestioned. Rarely did Socrates present his own
definition of things (though he does try to define justice in his best
known work, "The Republic"); instead, he wanted people to own up to the
fact that no one knew what life was about, and that by assuming they did
they prevented themselves from ever approaching wisdom. Such an approach
came to define the Socratic method, and today people still use his form
of argumentation to peel away layers of assumption and gain insight into
the foundations of what we claim to know.

His success as an individual failed socially, however, because the
elders of Athens did not like the way he encouraged the youth to
question tradition and the canons of social opinion on subjects such as
truth, virtue and knowledge. People favored the public definition of
these things because they fostered social stability, whereas he began a
movement which very much destabilized what others had long regarded as
sacrosanct. For this they condemned him to death; and believing in
justice as greatly as he did, he complied with the judgment and
administered their poison himself.

What was then true of society remains so today. We are brought up with
basic notions of life, existence and truth which many claim to be
self-evident but few can define. I have witnessed people bring God
Himself to task based on such empty ideas -- when in fact their
disagreement really boils down to, "Things aren't going the way I want
them to". Take for example the laws of God, which are clear enough, but
are constantly redefined to be "inapplicable" if they disagree with a
person's desires.

Because these basic concepts remain unexamined, they can sometimes take
on the role of mystical symbols which shy from definition. I have seen
people on television claim unbelievable things in the name of "God's
will", or "justice", or "destiny", as if the power of these words
themselves requires no further understanding. In fact, conversation
about their real meanings is avoided, and why? Would it lessen the magic
hold of "God's will" has over people, if they thought it meant
illumining the world with the spirit of His love by way of action and
example? A far less versatile buzzword that would be!

How much does our package of cultural assumptions affect the way we see
the world and experience of God and spirituality? Is our understanding
of these terms really an understanding, or more an inchoate "sense"
passed down to us by family and friends? Might the real truth be so
foreign to us that -- as people throughout time have always done -- we
would reject the very Prophets of God Themselves should They arrive on
our doorstep and proclaim loudly the answer to our hopes?

What is this "sense" of truth we hold to so dearly that it provokes such
virulent debates, yet likely blinds us from the beauty and simplicity of
Truth itself? I have known too many people whose joy was ruined by the
demands of religion, whereas in His Own Book I find such declarations as
these:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Were men to discover the motivating purpose of God's Revelation, they
would assuredly cast away their fears, and, with hearts filled with
gratitude, rejoice with exceeding gladness.

My counsels and admonitions have compassed the world. Yet, instead of
imparting joy and gladness they have caused grief...

It behoveth them that are endued with insight and understanding to
observe that which will cause joy and radiance.

#+END_QUOTE

In further entries I would like to examine this effect of our culture
further, because it appears to condition our attitude toward some of the
things that matter most. My entry next week will look at "competition"
in society, and how much it determines our views on the next life.
