:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       E9B042E8-E3EF-4174-96CA-053A566BA49C
:SLUG:     the-measure
:END:
#+filetags: :journal:
#+title: The measure

What if progress along the mystical path toward God is measured by our
capacity to love our own creation? According to what I called "the
reflexive principle" a few weeks ago, this love gauges the amount of
love I have to offer the world around me; and which sets the bar for my
faith in how much God loves me.

This faith has to do with my certainty that my prayers to find Him will
be answered; or that He wishes to assist me; or that after asking for
something my attitude is not, "Why would He do that for me?", but
rather, "Why wouldn't He?"

I don't mean self-love by saying this, which is usually love for an
imagined identity rather than the real stuff of who we are; I mean love
for all the beauty and ugliness, the imperfections and the things we do
well; I mean sitting down to prayer at the end of the day and thanking
God for having made /this/ the seat of my awareness.

In a way, it's about being /raazi/ concerning those aspects of my being
which are largely beyond my control. This opens an eye (the eye of a
lover, who sees beyond all "flaws") to who and what we truly are.

The opposite of this is self-hatred, where is most of the focus is on
who we might become. In fact, we hate even our efforts toward it, such
that we hardly believe we can accomplish the perfections we've set for
ourselves. We are rotten at the core, and only by shunning our creation,
and bending it to some nobler end, can we hope to salvage something from
this ruined existence.

Thinking on it, I found that some religious and philosophical
institutions have enshrined this mentality, becoming a sort of
institutionalized anti-humanism. They see us starting from a point of
sin, or lack, or ignorance, and most of the "point of life" is in
escaping that original condition. By validating a sense of
self-loathing, and indicating that this journey is the only hope of
redeeming a being who otherwise shouldn't have been, they lock people
into a fervent wish to escape their own skins.

But by loving our own creation, I mean to say that we began whole and
perfect, as a seed begins perfect. Everything the tree is meant to be
lies within the seed, it only needs tending and nurturing to bring out
all of its fruits. What it needs is warmth and encouragement, not the
prodding sense that as a sapling, it's hardly grown enough. What child
would respond well if constantly compared to the adult who it was yet to
be?

I wonder even if we don't halt ourselves along the path of our true
growth by that loathing, like a plant hidden in darkness. Can we open
our arms fully to the sunlight when we don't believe we're worth it? Or
is real happiness found in being pleased with what is.
