:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       7FCD282C-D2F7-4C1F-9305-49862E3CA656
:SLUG:     a-spiritual-inheritance
:END:
#+filetags: :journal:
#+title: A spiritual inheritance

I was thinking this morning about pain and hardship, especially those
endured by my friends. Specifically loneliness: how some long to find
that special person they can love and commit to, but after years and
years never do. What is the purpose of that kind of pain? And then
others find their true love in school (even kindergarten! as I heard on
the radio), and have never been alone. Why is fate so random?

If such bounties are a kind of wealth, it made me think of rich and poor
people, and of their children. When someone grows up having everything
-- beauty, health, money, intellect, opportunities -- how often they
fail to appreciate the real value of it, never having known its loss. In
fact, they might have every worldly thing a person could wish for, and
still spend a great deal of their time complaining about how things
aren't as they want them to be.

In a poor family, it can be just the opposite. The children, born with
nothing, enjoy the smallest things. If they happen to meet with bounty
later in their lives, they value it the way a person born to it simply
cannot. Such "early poverty" enriches their appreciation, and adds to
the savor of the good things they encounter later in life.

It made me think that if I had children, and somehow knew with certainty
that they would inherit limitless wealth at the age of forty, which
would I choose for them: an early life of wealth, or of poverty?

If they were bound to encounter wealth, wouldn't starting them in
poverty be much better? They would then know both sides, appreciate
things better, and understand the lot of the poor. They would know joy
and happiness cannot be bought with money, or that the people it
attracts are not always what they seem. Starting in poverty would bestow
a certain wisdom, maturity, and sense of value; whereas growing up rich
would only create expectations of the best, so that when more riches
come, they are but another tally mark in the bank-book. What is wealth
to a person who already has wealth?

Then I thought of God. If we are His children, and after death are to
receive a spiritual inheritance of heavenly joy, peace and reunion,
which would God choose for us at the beginning: a life of poverty or of
wealth?

For example, if a person is bitterly lonely, year after year, how
intensely will they cherish communion with their Lord, once the veils of
separation are lifted. Or if they now experience pain and anxiety, how
ineffable the sweet strains of peace. Their hardship prepares the heart
and attunes the spirit, until even the simplest bounties are a blessed
reprieve.

Had we started out with these things and always known them here, what
value would they have for us in the next life but an increase in degree?
In some ways, life is like a prolonged spiritual fast, a place where
love and joy are always momentary and hard-fought. And like the first
drink of water at the end of fasting, will not our entrance into
eternity offer a sweetness that only a lifetime of anguish could build
up to?

Thus I wonder, for all those feelings of loneliness in the world, if
these are merely the sure sign that we are being preparing for a
long-awaited hug, soon to come, that will never end...
