:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       004BD234-7800-4B30-AEA5-F85063860CD3
:SLUG:     faith-and-value
:END:
---
title: Faith and value
tags: journal
---

The perception of value determines behavior; the soul of virtue is bound
up in how we feel about things. What is valued varies from person to
person, but behind every commitment lies respect for some ideal:
pleasure, safety, honor, love. When a thing becomes meaningless, it
drops from our lives; detachment is the natural consequence of failing
to see value in something relative to other things.

If how we see is a propelling force of conduct, how to transform vision?
The perception of value is not easily controlled. Can a person decide to
start loving someone, or choose not to? Value is driven from a deeper
source than the mind. It colors thought. If even our will is shaded by
what we seek to change, how can we make progress?

The only way I can think of to create a sense of value where none exists
is to inculcate a higher vision. When we look at a seed, for example, we
know its value because we appreciate the tree it can become. But if we
did not know about the tree, would we value the seed?

It would require the word of someone we trust to tell us that yes, this
seed will grow into something much greater than its present form. That
trust creates a sense of connection within our hearts to the unseen
reality beyond the seed. In this way, without experience we are able to
move past the smallness of the seed and approach the greatness of the
tree to come.

This transcendental value, or overlay of value upon a thing seen as
worthless, is faith. It works the other way as well. If we have faith in
the unseen form of something, it changes how we feel about its present
form. Thus the power of faith is in changing how value is perceived. It
can radically alter behavior.

Faith is created through education by an authority we accept. Our first
experience of this was our parents; the second, society. And although we
each possess a non-relative way to measure value: pain and pleasure: the
values projected by faith are needed to overcome the very narrow range
of such a measurement. Sometimes a momentary pain will lead to lasting
pleasure, and vice-versa. The values of the body are not sufficient to
govern life. We require education to create a system of values better
suited to the range of our existence.

If our spirits will survive physical death, this implies that another
system of values is needed to properly guide our actions in this life.
All choices have consequences. If some choices will echo past the grave,
our vision must include that fact. This is the role religion offers to
play based on the authority of its Founders. They describe a set of
values which will direct us toward the best possible outcome in the
long-term. Faith in that set of values leads to a specific range of
behavior, which is termed "virtuous".

One of the fundamental teachings, for example, is the beauty of all
things: even foul events have the underlying motive to train and better
us. When this beauty is actually seen, through faith, the heart falls in
love with what it sees. It then acts toward the world as one acts toward
anything beloved, with the result that sacrifice, patience, and
forgiveness, are all natural. Faith allows love to bloom, which flowers
in the form of virtue.

Each system of values is proven by the lifestyle it creates. I look to a
person's life for signs of happiness and grace before deciding what I
think about their values. Whether any system -- and the authority
proposing it -- is worthwhile, depends on what kind of outcome you are
looking for. If a farmer wants trees, he must learn to believe in the
nature of seeds, knowing when to sew, when to wait, when to reap; if
people want peace in the world, they must learn principles which lead to
enduring peace, when to act, when to fight, when to let things develop
as they will.

The hardest part is that what we want relates to value. This creates a
cycle difficult to escape from. If we are not taught what to want, how
can we value the teachings that lead to what we'd desire most had we
known about it? If a person's values are badly skewed, they will want
what is harmful without ever seeing the danger. This is why education of
children is so important before a limiting mindset takes over. If young
people are not instilled with a sense of life's wonderful potential,
they may never make the effort to seek it later on.

I can only suggest that you ask yourself whether your life is what you
want it to be. If not, question everything. It may be your efforts need
changing, or your values, your vision, your education. Do you treat
yourself and others the way you want to be treating them? It all
proceeds from the heart, which is powerfully affected by faith. What you
choose to believe in will determine the life you lead.
