:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       D8BA36B1-0E98-486F-866C-65EBDAD85FFB
:SLUG:     the-unexamined-life
:END:
#+filetags: :journal:
#+title: The unexamined life

Imagine one friend gives another an amazing piece of Arabic calligraphy,
framed under glass and bordered in ornate, gold leaf filigree. It is so
beautiful that the friend decides to mount it in the center of his
living room wall as the main piece in the room. The bold, black lines
curve left and right, forming the image of a woman's hair as it flows
down to the bottom of the page.

I visit this friend and ask him, "What does it say?" He replies, "What
does it matter? It's so gorgeous, just looking at it is enough for me."

Life is a lot like this. There is so much beauty -- in the pretty faces,
the grand ideas, the intricate systems of complex harmony -- I often
myself simply looking on in rapture. In those moments the sight itself
is enough; the experience of perception seems like the essence of all
life has to offer.

Then someone comes along who has spent the time and effort to learn
Arabic. He stands in the friend's house and says, "Do you know what's
written on that tablet?" The friend has no idea; he knows it only as a
thing of beauty, worthy of admiration. The Arabist turns to him in
surprise, "How long has it been here?" "A few years or so." "You never
thought to seek a translation?", he asks. The friend answers, "Does it
really matter? It sits on the wall so nicely, I thought it made a better
use for it than reading it!"

The Arabist turns back to the hanging script. "Well, though you don't
seem too interested, what you have on your wall reads: 'There are ten
bars of gold in the hollow oak, to reward the curious." The two go out
and sure enough, there is the gold. "This doesn't take away from the
beauty of the tablet," says the Arabist, "but learning how to read it
would have been a double benefit. Now you can enjoy both the form /and/
intent."

I've talked with people in my life who say similar things about life.
When I speak of mystical realities they say, "Why bother with all these
laws and exercises? The joys of my life are enough for me." Yet Plato
wrote, "The unexamined life is not worth living." Not because an
ignorant life has no beauty, but because, when placed next to the life
that could be ours, it fades away in comparison. Why not reap the double
benefit of significance and signifier?
