:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       01B2D2EA-D629-4DDA-8505-A662C543D109
:SLUG:     rhapsody-on-the-seven-valleys
:END:
---
title: Rhapsody on the Seven Valleys
tags: essays
---

In the valley of Search, one seeks out an entrance, looks for some
secret that will open the door, like pursuing a person we fancy, trying
anything to gain some interest.

Then the eyes that Intended One look toward us, and the realization of
possibility kindles a hope that turns the world upside down. What does
anything matter now? The Beloved has acknowledged you.

By immersing one's self in the problem of remoteness and proximity, the
differentiation between this world and that -- the land of the servant
and the plane of the King -- becomes more plain. It is seen that time
and place are not real, but perceptions of the ego's experience, like
light playing on the eyes. When these two falsehoods fade away, and the
vision of the seeker transcends its limitations, then beginning and
ending are one; you have already achieved your goal. The Beloved is near
enough to be called your own self.

The fish has now returned to the Ocean, and there is no question of
"Where is God?" As the perceptive faculties develop, and spiritual
vision of faith becomes more real, it is seen how all evidences of
distinction proceed from the understanding of the individual, and are
not related to the Infinite. In a sense, the world we see is the
manifestation of our own ignorance. As we see it, good is contending
with evil, and there are always battles. Yet beyond all hindrances of
vision, evil is as directly related to the Truth as good.

At this point there is no more striving, and nothing leads astray.
Perfect contentment ensues. Where can the lover's eye turn that he does
not witness the beauty of the Beloved? Every breath is a kiss, every
breeze an embrace. Whatever his outward condition, such a seeker is
content with both life and death. Nothing gives, nothing takes away. His
very existence is his bountiful food.

Finally, because he has sated the passions of knowing, the heart of the
seeker is prepared to receive. And now from the cold night a fiery dawn
emerges, and the spring rains begin to descend from the winter peaks.
With all this flooding of light the heart of the lover is thrown about,
because he is only a mite in a vast world. Everything he knew was only
the beginning of knowledge; and, having thought himself satisfied, he
finds that it was only the bliss of ignorance, whereas now he must
contend with awe. This is the babe birthing from the womb, and the
dreamer awakening. The world he sees now exceeds his imagination.

Through all this, it finally pervades his soul that he is less than
nothing -- even non-existent. Placing upon himself the cloak of fan√°, he
returns to the Ocean as a single drop, and is gone. Yet, through his
form be lost, his essence is not destroyed, and the world still receives
his benefit. When a cow defecates in the garden, are we later able to
the dirt and say, "Look, there it is?" The form is lost, but the essence
remains, and imparts its properties to the soil. So it is that the body
has form, but no essence, and the soul has essence, but no form. In
trapping our consciousness within the limited frame of our
life-conception -- which is based initially on our material experiences
-- we divide ourselves from the nature of our origin, and become like a
ray of sunlight buried in a cave. This is illusion. It is we who bind
ourselves to that cave through a false sense of requirement, since we
are unfamiliar with the nature of things. When we relinquish all
feelings of knowledge, and divest ourselves of concepts even as basic as
existence itself, our spirit is freed, and we find that nothing was
holding there but our belief that we should have been.

Freed of space, the soul is a part now of both sun and earth; freed of
time, there is on question of proceeding; freed of knowledge, the prison
bars are shattered, and we enter a world where what we had known as
nothing was not even so stable as false conjecture; and freed of limits,
we resume our place in the Infinite, and there is nothing left but the
will of the Creator. Questions of purpose are relative to where, when
and why; but to that world, this place is such madness that questions
are their own answers. And thus the journey is begun.
