:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       99CE95D3-B83A-48B5-AE16-520866200868
:SLUG:     why-bother
:END:
---
title: Why bother?
tags: journal
---

When one climbs a mountaintop to watch the sunset, what is the object?
And if another doesn't bother, and stays at the bottom of the hill, what
has he lost? Some things are simply beautiful, wonderful, and deserve
attention for no other reason. Truth, beauty, virtue, God, deserve to be
loved because they are the essence of what is lovable. To ask "why" is
to miss the point: they are the why!!

Consider the love relationship: a man pursues the woman, dates the
woman, but why? Is it for the child, the family, what comes after? Or
isn't the whole process its own reason for being? It happens because it
wants to happen; because we desire for it to happen. There may be an
"outcome", but that follows later: the experience itself is the reward.
As Richard Feynmann said of his love of physics, "Physics is like sex:
sure, it may give some practical results, but that's not why we do it."

To pursue religion for the sake of a glorious afterlife is to put in all
that effort for the soul without knowing why. That is, it's better to
walk the mountain in ignorance and enjoy its beauty than to spend the
whole journey thinking of the top. God is His own reason for being
sought, His own proof. Spirituality would otherwise just be another kind
of commercial enterprise -- albeit based on a stranger economy.

Maybe the confusion is that people are like grammarians, sore athirst,
debating the ways and means of drinking and what comes after; until an
ignorant man passes them and says, "Your thirst should be all the proof
you need that drinking is worthwhile! Cease your ramblings and find the
river!"

I asked a friend once: "In marriage, you grow closer together every day,
right?" He said: "Yes." I replied: "So, do you stay married for the sake
of some perfect day in the future, or for each one of those lesser
days?" The marriage, if well-founded, is its own reason for being; even
though it may improve all the time, it's in this very process of
improvement that the purpose lies.
