:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       933E8207-2396-495E-8F2F-3146AFAF07C0
:SLUG:     a-realization
:END:
---
title: A realization
tags: journal
---

Something that's been puzzling me a lot lately is my reaction to
possible romantic relationships. When I was younger I remember wanting
to meet someone very much, and getting into relationships almost as
quickly as they became available. But I realized in the end that either
my personality is not very amenable to living with another person
(something I still think may be true), or I've been finding women who
don't really want the kind of person I am.

These days I'm averse to any sort of relationship other than friendship.
When things start to get closer, I pull back, sometimes harshly so. The
mere thought of it depresses me, and I find myself getting unhappier the
more things might develop with someone. It has led me to believe that I
might have been made for the hermit's life, spending most of my time
with thoughts and other interests. But last night a realization struck
me with all the force of the truth, and I think I understand now why
I've been avoiding it -- other than the usual reasons of fear and
uncertainty.

What I was thinking about was love. Most of the poems I've written about
love start with the thought of a particular person (or persons), with
real inspiration coming from the translation into the spiritual
dimension. I'm thrilled by the reality of love, and find my happiness
wherever it occurs: love for beauty, computers, ideas, people, food,
etc. It doesn't really matter what prompts my experience of love, since
they all seem to share common traits that I connect back to their origin
in God. In this way I experience God through my love of the world.

It's been my life's ambition to learn how to love all things. This is no
easy task -- many things still bother me and I wish for them to change,
as if to wipe them from my experience of life -- but month by month I
learn more, and move further down that road. Life as I experience it
today is incomparably richer than what I knew as a young person. It's a
labor I dream of, and I feel as if untold worlds await me behind each
new moment.

I describe this as a pursuit of universal love, or true love; but the
world's [[file:romantic.ideal][romantic ideal]] seems to credit only
exclusive loves. Everyone I talk to wants love, but often they want only
one or a few forms: love of a person, career, family, etc. When I talk
about universal love, some suggest that it's impossible for mortal
beings, or flatly state they don't want such a thing! Of those who want
it, many retain the thought that it lies always beyond reach. But I
intend to find this universal love, this complete vision, or die having
made of my life an earnest attempt. Yet this also where I run into
problems with those who want the typical ideal.

The modern romantic ideal envisions one person as the primary focus of
our capacity to love (with a possible allowance for children, though
some relationships even suffer when children appear, because it
distracts from that singular mutual focus). In essence, one person
becomes the "sink" of the other's best energies, and they the "source"
for replenishing them. By feeding each other in this way, the
relationship perpetuates with enough excess that some degree of social
involvement is possible.

Too much external involvement, however, deprives one side of the pair of
what they need to replenish that lost fuel. One cannot be the focus of
another who is too much outwardly occupied. This is the situation of an
"unloved spouse", who must turn to others to get what he or she needs.

This dynamic is what I grew up believing in, and I used to see no
problem with it. I was even eager to participate. But I found in the end
/that my dream of universal love is incompatible with the romantic
ideal/, and I am unwilling to give up that dream. Why is it so essential
to me? Because I believe that if I can discover true love for all
things, then I can believe -- with all my mind, my heart and soul --
that God loves all things in me. This is a form of my quest for God, and
it seems unreasonable and unjust for a person to ask me to give up that
quest. There are things we should never ask of one another.

The thing is, I have many loves -- programming, reading, thinking,
photography, chess, and more -- and almost all of them require
significant amounts of uninterrupted time to achieve fruition. This fact
has been called "selfish", because I demand time to myself to complete
what I love. (To those who've said it, my being "selfish" is usually
paying attention to things other than themselves -- though they rarely
see how selfish this claim of selfishness is. If a man can never expect
time to himself, how are people to get anything done?)

Under pressure to be less "selfish", I have bent to the ideal before:
the belief that all my love and attention should go to one person. But
when my love turned again to other things, the word "selfish" returned,
and with it various forms of jealousy: anger, resentment,
vindictiveness. I've heard my laptop called "the other woman" more than
once, because I chose to focus on it rather than the person I was with.
When they're around they want it all! absolute focus and attention; an
exclusive love that ignores every other thing.

Exclusive love, however, is the anti-thesis of universal love. Rather
than making progress in learning to love all things, I experienced a
constant pressure to love one thing above all. However much I've heard
the desire expressed to watch my spirit to fly, I've felt an unconscious
wish to ground me. At times, it even seemed others wished to become my
God: a focus of worship, origin of laws, setter of standards. If I
happened to choose one of God's laws above their interests, it provoked
anger.

Faced with this demand to relinquish my universal dream, I have at times
relented. I've bent as far as I could, until the bitterness of despair
was too great. My dream and my romantic love became at odds: pursuing my
passion began to hurt the one I loved. How can I withhold my heart in
this way and still have something left to give? What in the world was
being requested of me??

But I can no more sacrifice my soul's life than I could violate my
integrity in the name of a just cause. They want a passion from me that
asks for the muting of all other passions. Unsurprisingly, I became more
and more dead inside as this progressed. I stop writing, creating,
seeing people. My life became an endless hope for escape. I could
neither move nor stop. My existence began to decay.

And when things ended this way, I faced a terrible realization (this is
what I became conscious of last night): /Where did all my love go/? I
spent years trying to devote the majority of my heart and soul to one
person after another -- curtailing my writing, hobbies, and creative
output -- but where is that love now? As far as I can see, it was
wasted.

Whenever I pursue the universal love, the results affect large numbers
of people: those who use the software I write, who read my thoughts,
experience my friendship or find beauty in my art. In this way I feel
worthwhile, because people around the world receive the fruits of my
love. If one doesn't care for something, another will. I don't have to
tailor my work to one bias -- there are as many perspectives as there
are people. As long as I honestly love what I do, someone out there will
appreciate it.

The demands of exclusive love are the opposite of this. Rather than
benefiting whomever is receptive, I must aim my love at one mind, one
point of view, one set of prejudices. If they don't appreciate it, it
falls flat; if they do, they might keep it to their own heart. The
fruits of this love rarely reach beyond that one person, unless it's an
outward-directed activity we both share in.

As a result I can spend years devoting my heart to one person, expending
time and thought and energy -- and then one day they leave, and all of
it is lost. There is nothing to show but what I learned from the
experience. Even that does not go beyond the relationship, does not
touch other's lives, except insofar as I now treat them better. It's
like a mutual navel-gazing society to which no one else is invited.

In this type of scenario I feel my capacity as a human being is wasted.
This is why I fear relationships that seek the romantic ideal. When I
start dating someone, they don't want to hear about my love of all
things, about how sometimes I don't want to go out with them but would
rather stay home and write. They want to hear how I love them more than
anything else, how they are more beautiful than everyone else, that I
would give up everything for their sake. Hence my realization: that I
avoid romantic relationships because I have a dream and don't want to be
pulled away from that dream, sucked dry by a heart who in reality is
thirsting for God. I am not a surrogate God by any means, and do not
wish to devote my life to anyone's quest for satisfaction. Is it really
"selfish" that I would rather benefit more people than just one? Each
time I've been married, I stopped writing. But I would rather write and
offer myself to whomever passes by, than lose my writing for one
person's sake; while the person who could join me in this endeavor is
the one who would cause me to write even more.
