:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       E24BE930-FDBF-47EF-BABE-D889439618E7
:SLUG:     finding-a-new-sword
:END:
---
title: Finding a new sword
tags: journal
---

I love to play fantasy adventure games on my laptop, especially right
now /Neverwinter Nights/. In those sort of games, it's typical to start
out as a fighter character who wields a plain, simple sword. It's a good
sword, capable of doing a fair bit of damage, but there's not much sexy
about it. Just a long piece of metal for bashing in the heads of a few
kobolds. Next kobold.

As you journey on, sure enough the character undoes enough kobolds to
begin raising in levels, until the amazing day when he finds his first
longsword +1. At the beginning this is a wonderful event, because, you
see, it's a magical sword. It almost glows with possibilities. It's
likely has very little weight, and shines with its own light when you
wield it. It probably has its own name.

It reminds of the day when I traded in a Toshiba laptop for my first
Apple PowerBook. It was like going from a longsword to a longsword +1.
(There are many changes in my life which bear a striking similarity to
the feelings evoked by adventure games).

A few days ago I decided to upgrade to one of the newest PowerBooks,
which were announced this past week. I made a little table to determine
how much "better" they were, and found they had improved in no less than
fourteen categories. Yes, I had found my longsword +2 -- with added fire
damage!!

So as I was saying my prayers at the end of the night and getting
excited about the new laptop -- friends who know me well understand the
spiritual connection I have to computers, which are, for me, a mystical
window into the worlds of the mind -- it occurred to me that in every
game I've ever played there has always been a longsword +4, and a +5,
and so on until you find a weapon named "Demonslayer" or some such, with
abilities so amazing it makes it hard to sleep at night.

It was at this moment I realized: we are always heading toward something
better. I don't mean "better" in the sense that what we have is no good;
a longsword +1 in the hands of a level 3 fighter is a fine thing, and
it's worthy of much appreciation the first day you find. But as a
character progresses in ability, he will need better equipment -- and lo
and behold that equipment is always there to be found. There may be
challenges and difficulties along the path, but after every mountain is
another valley full of new goods and magic items.

This realization tempered my excitement somewhat -- now knowing each new
thing is stepping stone, there to be treasured until giving way for
something better suited to our future -- and it also showed me there is
never a cause to worry: what is needed can always be found.

I suppose this is a matter of faith, since my belief in these things is
tied to my belief that God is willing to provide them. It both detaches
me from seeing each new longsword as the "end all, be all", and fills me
with a sense of excitement at wondering what each new sword will look
like -- whether I find it in this world or the next. It gave me a
distinct feeling that things will never cease becoming more wonderful.
