:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       D1D791FF-8D8B-48D3-A029-F16F7504F2E3
:SLUG:     four-kinds-of-devotion
:END:
#+filetags: :journal:
#+title: Four kinds of devotion

In my experiences lately I have found there to be four basic kinds of
devotion. These categories are arbitrary, of course, but they help me to
identify how to interrelate with various types of people.

From my study I link these four kinds to /The Four Valleys/, by
Bahá'u'lláh: The first group are devoted to a purpose (maqsúd), the
second to understanding and praising God's creation (mahmúd), the third
to experiencing ecstatic union with the Divine (majdhúb), and the fourth
to losing themselves utterly in the Beloved (mahbúb). However, I cannot
claim any tie whatever to these. This is simply what I have seen and
reflected on.

The first kind of devotion expresses a feeling of duty. People here --
and I have heard this said -- make the statement, "My duty is my
desire." They have a strong sense of right and wrong and in some cases
may become militant. However, this is their strength. Their heart fills
with the nobility of their Cause and they arise like champions. They are
willing to face any enemy. They are the spiritual image of a bright and
shining knight.

These people can also be very hard on themselves, demanding perfect
obedience and laboring over every flaw. Again, this is a source of
strength as they work tirelessly at the task of self-perfection.
Whatever service they can offer to their Lord brings them joy. They are
the soul of dedication.

Without a Cause to commit themselves to -- that is, without something
productive to do -- the strength of this type may become too strong for
their own good. They castigate themselves for not doing enough. They
wear themselves out and begin to despair of ever being useful. It's like
an army of committed soldiers left too long out of battle. Their will to
conquer evil overflows its bounds and they may start to fight amongst
themselves, leveling criticism at the faults they perceive in others,
and constantly blowing the trumpet call to "arise!" They are like tea
which has been left too long to steep: they can become bitter. For them,
peace lies in fulfilling their commitments and leaving behind as perfect
a legacy as they can manage. This noble crowd looks forward to death as
a student does to graduation.

The next kind of devotion are the gnostics, the intimates of God's
mysteries. Both good and evil make sense to them, so they are not so
quick to throw a fit. This inner knowledge produces a mellowness and
calm, and they look forward with fascination to each new day. They are
able to unravel mysteries and dispel complexities. Their focus shifts
away from the word and more to its meaning. Their eyes turn to God alone
and their heart begins to dissociate from the world. They become
ascetics without trying, not even paying attention to their actions much
-- because they hold to the verse, "Say: All things are of God." Even
their own failures do not trouble them, unless they cause them to feel
disconnected from God.

These people enjoy prayer and meditation most of all, observe silence,
and evince a natural detachment from the world. They think of God
constantly and look for His signs everywhere. Whereas the first group
are the champions of God, waging holy war, these are His counselors, who
bring peace, understanding and reconciliation.

The greatest risk to these is inaction, since the world and its affairs
do not attract them. They are as much content to act, as to sit by and
watch, amused by everything. At times, they must be prompted to express
their views. Sometimes you don't even know who these people are. They
are caught up in God. Their devotion is one of surpassing faith.

The third kind is the plane of the lovers. These people are crazed and
cannot be dealt with. It takes profound wisdom for them just to interact
with the world. They reign themselves in only because they don't wish to
harm the ones they love: otherwise they would exceed all bounds. These
people are insane, though they don the cloak of sanity with every
morning. Leave them to their hearts and they offend without meaning to.

The reason for their ecstasy is that they see all things around them as
the face of God Himself. He is no longer a far-off King to be served
until death, or a shining Orb one turns to in worship, but the living
Reality of all things. The lovers go mad from intoxication. They are too
excited, too in love, too eager. They seem foolish and unworthy of
responsibility. In the court of the King, they are its jesters. They
would throw themselves into a fire just to make one of His servants
smile.

Because of their foolishness, these people cannot be frustrated or
harmed. They don't care about anything, and they can't suffer defeat,
because their Beloved surrounds them at every moment. Their days pass
with a stupid grin always on their face.

They are exemplars of action, however, because each moment they wish to
offer some new kindness to their Love. They cherish people and the
world. Everything is a token; every act is received by Him. Their days
are spent in continual thanksgiving. These people make the best of
friends, but are among the least respectable. They are constantly being
counseled to improve themselves, though they can't see what improvement
has to offer. They are always happy and see no faults. They can't even
distinguish between "good" and "evil" to tell you that both are one.
Always dancing, they advance to His throne.

The fourth kind of devotion consists of a group of heretics. These are a
living mystery. If they were to speak openly of what they see, a cross
would be prepared for each of them. These people hide themselves, and on
different occasions may appear as any one of the other three types. Most
could not bear their open company, unless you were a brother. Without
meaning to, they would ruin everything you hold dear.

While the first group are devoted to God, and the second know God, and
the third see and feel God, these fourth reckon no difference between
themselves and the Object of their worship. How could they? To them, any
assumption of selfhood is blasphemy. If one of them says, "I am God",
how could it be understood properly? since all three words -- "I", "am"
and "God" -- reference a deeper meaning.

Because their Beloved is all -- and this is the station where only the
Beloved can be seen -- their bliss is complete. The successes of all are
felt as their own. In fact, there is no division between "you" and "me",
"here" and "there". There is only one soul on this plane.

These are not just inmates of the Kingdom -- as the lovers are -- they
are its very foundation. Each one is a spiritual axis; they are like the
eyes of humankind. However, as their kind of devotion must imply, not
one of them has any station or authority of his own. They are simply
mirrors, reflecting whatever light He shines in their direction. They
make no claim and expect no recompense. Praise them or berate them, they
hold to the verse, "God will compensate each one out of His abundance."

Here even madness is left behind, because there is no "lover" anymore.
These people assume whatever role is appropriate to the situation. They
do not feel exalted, but plain -- however, to them plainness is of the
essence of exaltation. You may not even know they exist, because they
speak differently to each listener. Also, they seek nothing. They do not
wait for heaven, or hope for grace. Whatever God wills is a paradise to
them.
