:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       C2BFFD9C-826D-42DD-9111-F82E408D8EFE
:SLUG:     a-letter-of-love
:END:
---
title: A letter of love
tags: journal
---

This love letter is a composite of several letters written over a long
period of time. There is really no reason to post it here other than to
share the beauty of the sentiment. If you've had enough cheese today,
you can pass it by. But I think it expresses an essential quality of
relationship which I've begun to conceive of as universal and accessible
by other means than just a single person. It's about the soul longing
for God, Who is seen wherever the eyes are capable.

A thousand hellos. If I could fold myself enough, and survive the
journey, I would send you my hand to hold instead of this letter. But
since paper and ink are like trusted friends, I gave them these words of
affection and asked them to seek you out.

I think of you often here -- where the wind and the sea are cold, and
the chill probes me with its ghostly fingers. But the memory of you
keeps me warm. It chases away the minutes and the hours until I forget
where I am.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Recall me to myself, for I soon forget once thoughts of you have cast
their net.

#+END_QUOTE

#+END_QUOTE

I teeter on the brink of falling headlong. A wave of insanity has risen
to immerse me. Sometimes my pen and I sit here, in this cafe or around
town, commiserating. He leaves a stream of black tears -- which are
here, dried on this paper. Our rapport is so strong, his weeping traces
my thoughts; so I send you this record of our misery, showing as it does
my feelings.

So many words clamor to express themselves. Patience, I tell them; not
everything must be done at once. But can you sense the state of my
being? Everything is in uproar. The signposts are uprooted -- there is
no more sense of left and right, up or down. The days are nights, and
sleep finds me only as the sun rises. What is to come of my heart's
kingdom? You have conquered it without sword or arrow.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Where banners once flew in proud disdain a king now weeps for his
kingdom's bane.

#+END_QUOTE

#+END_QUOTE

The space between us is a great plain over which the steed of time only
saunters. His insouciance drives me mad. I speak to him about you, and
who we go to meet, but his ears only twitch as if to say, "My pace is
set, my friend; even mortal love cannot change it." But he is so wrong!
Whether we go fast or slow, desire lengthens the distance with every
step. If only I had wings, I would leap from this costive mare to find
you.

Perhaps the folds of my letter have stuck together from the sweetness of
the ink; or maybe this paper, bent to take its burden, has whispered
something of its ardent master. At times I wonder if they will steal my
words, and offer them to the sugar merchants for an easy exchange. But
if my humble thoughts do not reach you for whatever reason, my prayers
and love are certain to. What else can be said? Words, even if
well-crafted, can only hold so much. "For the stream's bed cannot hold
the sea."

When I think of you lately, a wash of light suffuses my being. I feel
joy in places unrelated to my physical self. This is a new experience
for me. What organ feels the bounty of love? It is a mystery of gladness
that ruins my days and nights. You make me sigh. You make my eyelids
flutter. In the mornings, I recall the music of your voice and can no
longer stay in bed. This energy won't let me alone. A deep pleasure runs
through my muscles like a current. And my heart... sometimes, I think,
were it susceptible to feinting, I would lose my mind.

I am so much in love with you. If you touched me now it would send me to
heaven. Do you realize your power? Yet you are so kind. I want to curl
up around the phone and let your sweet voice send me to oblivion... Now
I feel constantly as if I have to write you, or write poems -- or do
something to relieve this pressure of light longing to shine out. You've
made my days and nights a constant sunrise, each promising to begin the
best day of my life.

To the poet in me you have been the most lovely muse. It isn't hard at
all to write when I think of you. My fingers seem to know the way and
summon the words to follow. The pen feels light in my hand. The ink
hungers for the paper. Your magic has awoken a magic within me -- until
I feel fey and mystical, ready to split the night of remoteness with a
single stroke. Whatever you've done, it shakes me to the core and back
again, filling my mind with sweet memories. I believe now that knowing
you is one of God's gifts to me.

What can I do, but write to stave off this insanity? Call me again some
time, my sweetheart. Call me and let me hear your voice so I can survive
another day. Whatever semblance of peace I once had is fled. Your memory
chases away all other thoughts. Call me and resuscitate this poor
creature, for whatever I might be doing when you read this, the rest of
me longs to hear from you.

But how can I last in your presence? How can I keep from fading to a
sigh and rejoining the vapors of pre-existence? If I could write, "I
love you", strong enough to mirror my heart, it would fly from this page
and wrestle you to the ground, and show such devotion as to melt you
away. Though words can only go so far. These have hardly conveyed my
turmoil. I have to stop -- or even my fingers will go insane! I love
you. All the rest, only God and angels may know. Perhaps they will
whisper it to your soul in the deep of night, or grant you the sweet
dreams of loving reunion.

After all this things only grow more intense. Your smile is a luminous
liquid, seeping inside to warm me everywhere. That water turns to fire,
and then watching you is like a presence of flame: it cooks my heart
over embers that won't leave me alone! I write this after seeing you
briefly and the burning will not cease. I've talked about it to one
friend, but talking only makes the pain worse. Yet I can't leave off
thinking of you for the pain. Thinking or talking about it only makes
the wounds bleed fresh. My spirit is trapped between sight and
blindness: both are a torment. Remoteness is like sliding through time
on the edge of a blade.

These have been profound days. I am reading right now the story of
Majnun and Layli, by Nizami. How fine to see those expressions of
madness and know a glimmer of their purity. I suppose every experience
in life educates us -- though the school of love mistreats its students.
They prepare us for a greater understanding in time.

I think of you as a sign of God, revealing rays of the Immortal Beauty
in your pretty eyes, your laugh, your amazing smile. It affects me
deeply enough to realize: only God can touch my soul that way. Then I
remember how He created the world to reveal His attributes -- and there
they are: the beauty of life, the joy of loving, manifested in the
simple fact of your being.

Love answers to no one and makes no excuses; some things must be said
whether wisdom confirms it or not. I write this in pain -- but for the
beauty of that pain. I love you. I shall always cherish your memory as
one who gave me the gift of dwelling in the fires of rapture. From that
experience I have been nurtured in the mystic's way. It helped acquaint
me with the nature of my Goal.

You are such a heart-slayer! You kill me. And now that I am gone, what
remains must say goodbye.
