:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       7DFE00ED-04A1-431D-A365-A2CF66B12F53
:SLUG:     discipline-and-energy
:END:
---
title: Discipline and energy
tags: journal
---

A while ago, when talking about the [[file:j2005#thedarkside][light and
dark sides]] I think we all have, I was saying that while the light has
direction, the dark has energy. So it's not too strange that if left
alone, the dark will do what it decides to do -- while if left alone the
light will not! In fact, it takes energy to stop the dark and motivate
the light; they react oppositely to the influence of determined force.
Which raises the question of where the light gets its energy to oppose
the dark? This would seem to come from four very plentiful sources,
means by which the dark willingly grants its energy to the purposes of
the light: internally, from self-admiration and self-loathing;
externally, from love and hate.

For example, the light's is a world of discipline and control. The more
a person feels in control of themselves, they more capable they feel of
acting out the plans of the light; the less control, the more they feel
susceptible to stirrings of the dark. But where does the energy come
from to maintain all that discipline? I find from watching people that
it is either from deep self-loathing: they hate who they are and wish to
govern it -- or admiration: they love who they are and want to further
the good parts. Since these forces originate in the dark, they of course
both have the taint of "self" (from the light's point of view) and
secretly make the light feel ashamed to use them. Isn't there a source
of energy, it wonders, that might be utterly disconnected from the dark?
Pursuing that end, it might seek energy from other people, or purely
external motivations like social dictum. But in the end these too must
be enforced within the individual, and so the dark has to play its role.
There is no escaping the dark side, even though at times it seems like
all the light wishes to do.

I've even found that you can hear in a person's voice, and see in their
eyes, which part of themselves their sentiments are coming from. The
"pure light" sounds strangely tinny and high-pitched, like something
with little depth. When a person speaks in that voice alone, I'm almost
certain that whatever they're saying will not come to pass. The "pure
dark", on the other hand, is deep and dusky. If they speak in that
voice, I'm almost sure it /will/ come to pass, even if it's something
the speaker fears to happen.

When the two reach common cause, however, their voice has a real timbre.
If the dark is a lump of black iron, and the light a concept of steel,
the two together can become a keenly-tempered blade. It's like we have
these two ingredients and the real challenge is to learn the correct
admixture. It's a difficult balance to achieve, but the results make it
worthwhile.

So when people recite to me a new litany of discipline they've
introduced into their lives, I think, "There's the light side again,
seeking to regain its dominance." I can hear how the effort will tire
them out, how they will spend furtive evenings indulging themselves as a
way to release the inner pressure. I also listen for whether their
motive is from loathing or admiration, since these two have very
different dynamics.

On the other hand, if they talk about new plans for gratifying some
wish, I think, "There is the dark side, racing to escape its prison." I
hear how freeing and exulting the release will be, but also the nights
of worry, and self-recrimination for straying from the path.

It seems that none of us can live on one or the other side for too long,
without mental or emotional repercussions. And thus what I really listen
for is the person who seeks to marry the two sides: to serve a higher
purpose in a way that brings them continual joy. I am always listing to
hear such tones from my own voice.
