:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       53193E39-45DD-45E1-9C5B-E59D5F5DC0BB
:SLUG:     the-purpose-of-religion
:END:
---
title: The purpose of religion
tags: journal
---

* The soul's aim
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: the-souls-aim
:END:
The purpose of ears is to hear. If the soul is a being of awareness, it
exists to be aware of Something; and if mysticism is the art of
awakening the soul, its focus must be to concentrate that soul on the
Aim of its being.

I often hear the aim of religion expressed in terms of the self, and not
God. For example, a statement from the mystic Siyyid Burhánu'd-Dín, a
mentor of Rúmí:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
It's easy to flee from everything, but so difficult to flee from the
self. The source of your woes is the self. Unless you become as naught
and slay your self and your desire, you will not find release from your
tribulations. Die before death and bury yourself in the grave of
desirelessness and be happy.

#+END_QUOTE

The formulation here is common in mystical literature. It is also
entirely negative. It does not mention God, or the purpose for becoming
"selfless". It somehow associates the condition of void with being
happy. How? How can depriving one's self of all desire lead to
happiness?

If the purpose of ears is to hear, then it is true they need to be
cleaned, concentrated, and freed from distraction. But they don't exist
to hear silence. Removing all sound from one's environment and
obstruction from the ear canal is only a preparation -- and only worth
doing if what you want to hear deserves such effort.

It is easy to say "religion is about God", but hard to communicate. Love
of God leads naturally to everything religion asks of man; while trying
to acquire virtue through effort alone is like pushing lead uphill: your
own nature will fight you every step of the way. When there is love for
God and the soul sees God in all things, virtue proceeds naturally, the
way a lover is infinitely patient and forgiving of the one he loves. The
target of "effort" here is in finding the Beloved, and focusing one's
attention solely on Him. In that pursuit, for His sake, one should
strain every nerve. Instead, we try to achieve selflessness by
perfecting the self -- and wonder why it seems impossible!

* Mystical modes
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: mystical-modes
:END:
There are two basic modes in mysticism: negative and positive. The
negative strives to move away from self, and the positive to move toward
God. There is a time when the negative is very useful, since it can
clear away the obstructions blocking our sight. Here the effort is not
/acquiring/ virtue, but understanding the need for them. One cannot love
God until he sees Him; so there will always be a time of pure effort
when the soul is striving to find Him.

Once the seedling breaks through the soil, however, its focus must be on
the, the Source of its energy. I see this state expressed in the
following Hidden Word from Bahá'u'lláh:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
O Son of Light! Forget all save Me and commune with My spirit. This is
of the essence of My command, therefore turn unto it.

#+END_QUOTE

A letter written on behalf of Shoghi Effendi describes "true mysticism"
as "communing with the souls of the Manifestations". That is, it
emphasizes consciousness of Their Spirit -- and not the goal of
"desirelessness".

To show how pervasive the negative mode is, consider the way people view
their religious activities:

Fasting: When the believers abstain from food and drink during the
sunlight hours. Meditation: When a person sits quietly, and empties his
mind and heart of all things. Holy Days: When a believer does not go to
school or work. Chastity: When a person abstains from extra-marital sex.
Pilgrimage: When a believer travels to visit their Holy Shrines and pay
his respects to the cradle of the Faith.

These are quick answers I've heard numerous times; but is this what its
really /about/? They describe the believer's immediate praxis in terms
of how his life is affected, but do they touch on the purpose of the
activity? Is the period of fasting really about not eating or drinking
during the day?

God is missing from the picture. In the description of most religious
practices, I hardly hear Him mentioned at all. I asked a room full of
people once what religion meant to them, and only two referred to God.

Humanity is self-obsessed, and because of this it evolves doctrines of
self-denial to combat the problem -- yet this approach is simply
narcissism in another guise. We are so worried about the general lack of
spirituality that we kill whatever spirit remains from sheer anxiety.

* Emphasizing the self
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: emphasizing-the-self
:END:
Another example of this problem is when people worry deeply about their
spiritual progress. They become so worried, that the sheer weight of the
effort causes them to abandon the Path for long stretches of time -- in
the hope, I think, of gathering the energy they need to continue. I tell
them, "Forget about where you are, think of God", since the real reason
for their sorrow is that God is missing from their lives; yet instead of
turning toward Him, they respond by intensifying their awareness of His
absence.

This dynamic continues to thrive despite such words as these, from
`Abdu'l-Bahá:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
... Look not on the degree of your capacity, ask not if you are worthy
of the task: rest ye your hopes on the help and loving-kindness, the
favours and bestowals of Bahá'u'lláh...

One must never consider one's own feebleness, it is the strength of the
Holy Spirit of Love, which gives the power to teach. The thought of our
own weakness could only bring despair. We must look higher than all
earthly thoughts; detach ourselves from every material idea, crave for
the things of the spirit; fix our eyes on the everlasting, bountiful
Mercy of the Almighty, who will fill our souls with the gladness of
joyful service to His command "Love One Another".

#+END_QUOTE

In both cases, `Abdu'l-Bahá turns us away from the self and toward the
Beloved. He makes this point over and over again, Himself never dwelling
on people's weaknesses but always assuring them of the certainty of
Divine assistance:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Look not unto thy weakness, but rely upon thy Lord, and He will then
grant thee all thy desires and reveal to thee the answer without asking.

#+END_QUOTE

When a mirror turns toward the sky, it becomes as bright as the sun. It
does not need to be perfectly clean to do this; even a dusty mirror will
shine (though the cleaner the mirror, the more faithful its reflection
will be). This brilliance comes from the sun, and not from the mirror.
The mirror can burnish itself for a thousand years, but without turning
to the Sun it can never shine. All transformation proceeds from
orienting the self toward God -- utterly, completely -- and not from the
efforts we make to perfect ourselves; those efforts simply make us ready
for, and facilitate, such transformation.

* The humble egotist!
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: the-humble-egotist
:END:
I will give another, personal example that amuses me. Egotism is just
one of the many failings of my character. It always has been and I've
given up on "correcting" it. What's funny is that several people in my
community have called me humble. This makes me laugh, and I think, "What
are they thinking?" Humble I am not! I don't even try very hard. Viva la
resistance!!

But why do they say this? Perhaps it's because when people speak, I
listen. Even if someone interrupts me during a presentation, I give them
the floor. I don't do this because I'm humble and don't want to speak; I
do it because I view people as emblems of the Divine: I never know when
someone might be relaying a message from Him. For that reason, I listen
to each word, trying to decode its secrets. Inwardly it expresses a
relationship between me and my Goal; I am not thinking about myself, or
other people. Outwardly, it is seen as deferring my position to whomever
is speaking and being "humble" before them; in reality, I'm just a big
ego fascinated by the Lord.

So what, then, is humility? Is it the self having no ego, or the ego
momentarily disappearing in the presence of its Love? I've given up on
the task of being humble -- it is too hard; yet I am described as
humble. I take this as proof that God has the power to transform even
someone like me, and to make my behavior pleasing to others. In this
way, I believe His beauty is capable of transforming all of humanity.

* Back to the theme
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: back-to-the-theme
:END:
Until a soul discovers God he must make tremendous efforts, never
resting until he finds what will refresh his soul. Once this takes
place, his attention should be focused on that Treasure, communing with
Him always, until he sees Him everywhere and in all things. From this,
virtue will proceed, and the failings of self, forgotten. But without
the Beloved, religion is impossible. It only weighs people down with
awareness of their imperfections. It requires a pure love for God to
advance, in the same way that magnetism pulls bits of iron forward.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Neither the candle nor the lamp can be lighted through their own unaided
efforts, nor can it ever be possible for the mirror to free itself from
its dross. It is clear and evident that until a fire is kindled the lamp
will never be ignited, and unless the dross is blotted out from the face
of the mirror it can never represent the image of the sun nor reflect
its light and glory.

#+END_QUOTE

Every religious activity can be defined in terms of this relationship --
else why have religion at all? Likewise, I see the Writings of God like
a love story telling us about the One we seek and how to find Him. What
other purpose could they have? If the ears of the soul never hear the
Divine Melody, what are they for? Are we simply to become "desireless"?
or seek constantly to increase our desire for God!

Religion seems to oppose the natural inclinations of man, but I think it
fulfills those inclinations in a higher mode: attachment to God, desire
for God, taking pleasure in God, seeing God, falling in love with God,
becoming greedy for His nearness. Perhaps everything we are has a
positive fulfillment when God is the focus. Alone, our nature seems to
frustrate our purpose, but when God is taken into account those same
traits become the means of fulfilling it! It's a matter of placing the
self in a higher context -- adoration for the Beloved -- and not of
reviewing it in isolation.

It all boils down to a single point: love for Him! Yet how can this be
said properly when He and my words are two separate things? Then burn
away all words, all thoughts, until only He remains...

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
How can feeble reason encompass the Qur'án,
Or the spider snare a phoenix in his web?
Wouldst thou that the mind should not entrap thee?
Teach it the science of the love of God! (Saná'í)
#+END_EXAMPLE
