:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       D5F7ABFD-26E4-4857-9398-CE3E1DBC0A77
:SLUG:     the-point-of-it-all
:END:
---
title: The point of it all
tags: journal
location: 239 Misty Creek Dr, Monument, CO
---

I have been thinking lately that material things satisfy us only because
their reality draws from a deeper Source. What brought this to a point
for me is a statement by Bahá'u'lláh, where He projects God as saying to
humanity:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
O Son of Light! Forget all save Me and commune with My spirit. This is
of the essence of My command, therefore turn unto it.

#+END_QUOTE

This is one of my favorite statements of His, and I say it to myself
each night before going to bed. What does He mean to "Forget all save Me
and commune with My spirit"? It would seem to suggest dispensing with
all consciousness of the world, to reach a purer consciousness of "My
spirit". But in other places He rejects asceticism entirely, so I don't
believe He means for us to turn away from the one reality we know, to
point ourselves toward one we can know nothing of.

I'm beginning to think that by "spirit" He means that which makes this
world come to life (in the same way our own spirit makes our bodies come
to life): it's Quality. After all, there is somehow a difference between
a mere collection of atoms and a /refreshing/ glass of water.

Material forms have a capacity to lift our spirits, but my question is:
how do they have this capacity? I understand that light stimulates
photoreceptive cells in my eye, which stimulate electrochemical signals
throughout the neurons of my brain -- but at what point does this chain
of events end in the experience of beauty? What final chemical, or
electric charge, is it that comprises the transporting feel of great
art?

I think these base media are simply carriers. They bring to us a message
-- albeit filtered by the limits of each medium. But no matter how
reduced from its original perfection Quality may become -- whether in
the form of a drink of water, a painting, a chocolate bar -- the
underlying character of its manifestation is always the same.

Take light, for example. Most of our light originates from a blinding
source too far away to grasp. It illuminates everything
indiscriminately, yet is reflected from each place according to the
nature of that place. Although the manifestations of light are unique in
themselves, the underlying properties of its illimunation remain the
same. That is, some places reflect the light in a manner closer to its
pure form, such as mirrors, while others absorb most of its energy,
presenting us with a silhouette of darkness. Yet what reaches our eyes
in every case are those original quanta of energy from our faraway star.
However filtered, the essential properties of the light remain
undisturbed: in effect, everything we see when we go outside is the Sun,
seen through a lens of Earthly form.

Now if we are beings meant to commune with the potentialities of God's
spirit, then it is with that Spirit we should form our closest bond.
Continuning the analogy of light to spirit: A painter may use a brush
and canvas, but his real task is carving the light, so as to present
what it's capable of revealing. The pen and paper are not significant in
themselves -- however important in their role as media -- it's the
Reality conveyed by their means which is the /raison d'etre/.

One could even suggest that such a being discount the medium entirely,
until they have transcended its utility -- beyond, to what it serves to
manifest. "Forget all save Me and commune with My spirit". Bahá'u'lláh
statements now suggest to me that all things reflect His spirit, but we
should never get caught up in the things themselves. Rather, penetrate
them, move with the eye of the soul beyond their immediate appearance,
until one reaches what they were created to convey.

Another example of this is found in watching a television program.
Assume it's a good program; a great program! Something which moves you
and causes you to experience a genuine beauty.

First, there is the television signal transmitting the program. Since
it's invisible to you, there's no way for it to reach you or touch you.
A television is required. Thus, by necessity, we bring in the physical
medium of the television. One may even love their television, but in
fact it only serves to bring those programs into the scope of your
vision.

Let's say the television is a bit old: it has scratches on the screen,
it's dusty. As you watch, you might get distracted by these things. You
may want another television altogether. But if you concentrate on the
program you're watching, it's funny how all these minor flaws quickly
disappear. Soon, no matter how tiny or beat up or black and white your
television may be, it becomes all about the program.

Yet even the program is only a form of expression. There are sets,
actors, dialog, etc. One could get caught up even here: attracted to a
beautiful actor, disturbed by another's voice. But if the material of
the program is really worth it, even these are passed in your mind: you
focus deeper, to what the program is about, to the ultimate message
beneath.

In the end, if all of these stages of manifestation are passed beyond,
and the heart is filled and the soul informed, then all of these
physical realities will have served their purpose: of bringing you into
connection with something you deeply desire. To get there requires
bridging each of the gaps placed in your way, all of the physical
obstacles in the way of spiritual experience. But it's not that these
obstacles don't belong between you and the experience -- they are even
necessary to it! But depending on your point of view, they may or may
not get in the way.

I think what Bahá'u'lláh says in this quote is that the world is only a
vehicle, much like an Existential Television. It uses matter and form to
present a message to us, for the sake of our souls. How much we receive
of that Message is directly up to us, and deeply we choose to look.
