:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       4B71A984-4E96-48A6-8480-9548564C3D2D
:SLUG:     a-subtle-virtue
:LOCATION: 239 Misty Creek Drive, Monument, Colorado
:END:
#+filetags: :journal:
#+title: A subtle virtue

The idea of detachment has puzzled me for a long time, mainly because
its basic tenant -- as pursued by many of the people I know -- seems to
embrace a fundamental contradiction:

If the aim of religion is to foster unity, amity, peace and contentment,
how can a pursuit be called religious if it divides, provokes enmity and
unrest, or leaves a person dissatisfied? Yet this is exactly what occurs
when a person constantly rebels against their desires: they become an
individual at war. It is a kind of internal jihad -- as the Islamic word
"mujahiddin" actually connotes.

A person who strives to be detached in this way -- when the very nature
of the heart is to form attachments -- is committing internally what
would appear as an atrocity seen from outside. If one group (the
conscious mind) suppresses and dictates terms to all other groups
within, this is awfully familiar to those theocracies who have already
laid a bloody trail towards their God.

I think humanity's relationship with detachment has suffered from an
immature reading of the Holy Texts. When people feel guilty and
undeserving, they will naturally look to take this out on the person
they feel is to blame: themselves. Detachment becomes a perfect weapon
in that pursuit, a tool for the righteous mind to chastise the "unruly
(and hated) self".

But what if the nature of detachment were actually religious? What would
a religious detachment look and feel like?

I've thought of one simple example: Let's say that I like hot dogs. I
love hot dogs, those nice, beef quarter pounders slotted in a thick
potato roll. If someone tries to tell me to be detached from hot dogs,
they better go someplace else, because even if I were to deny myself
from such juicy beauties, the memory would still carry on in my heart.

But along comes someone who offers me a perfectly cooked filet mignon
steak. Now, despite my love of hot dogs, a steak is a vastly better
thing. There is no way I would fill up my stomach with a hot dog, when I
knew a steak was on its way. /I would even wait, passing up the hot dog,
if I knew for certain such a steak was soon to come/.

In this situation, my detachment from hot dogs can only be driven by a
love for steak. I cannot be detached from something in the absence of a
better alternative. And I must have complete faith in that alternative
-- feel its certainty humming within me -- if detachment is to become a
natural resonance of my heart.

So I begin to think that truly religious detachment is not at all about
denying one's self the world, but of coming to anticipate the beauty of
God -- and that the specious beauties of the world sometimes hinder that
perception.

If a friend of mine later came along and saw me not eating my hot dog,
he would say, "My goodness, how can you be so detached?" But to me it
would not be detachment at all. I'm simply communing with my
steak-to-be.

Also, there is another aspect of detachment which has always felt like a
deep conundrum to me: It is a basic feature of human psychology that to
earnestly involve ourselves in something, we must care about it -- but
to care deeply is synonymous with being attached.

A young man who is attached to his automobile will take fantastic care
of it: he keeps it clean, keeps engine running, the interior vacuumed...
By contrast, a person who "doesn't really care" often ends up with a
messy car and too-late trips to the mechanic. (I know I certainly fall
into the latter category).

I've seen the same thing at my work. As a programmer, I notice a vast
difference between the quality of work of someone who cares about what
they do, and the quality of someone "just looking to get the job done"
-- who only wants to create a functional solution and to move on as
quickly as possible. At a cursory glance, this detached emphasis on a
solution rather than its details seems best; but in actual fact, such
hapdash solutions almost always come back to bite you once the initial
feelings of correctness are gone. Programs written without care more
often than not do not stand the test of reality.

And yet, if a person cares /too much/, they agonize so dearly over every
detail of the problem that they lose sight of their original purpose
altogether. This leads to equally poor solutions, owing to their
inherent complexity and attempts to forsee issues which never
materialize. A similar situation happens if the car lover mentioned
above cares /too much/: He reaches the point of never driving his
vehicle at all so that he can always keep it safe.

I'm not sure detachment is simply the middle road. You have to care to
be involved. Heck, I have to care about something before I can even
remember it. Care too little and you lose connection, resulting in a
decrease in quality of attention; care too much, and you cut off
perspective, decreasing quality of purpose. What is the answer?

Maybe it lies in what we care about. In the case of the car, you need to
care about the car, but there are two forms of caring: direct, in which
your concern is for the beauty of the machine itself; and indirect,
where you concern is for the suitableness of the car in a driving
situation. As long as you care about driving more than what you drive,
you have a decent marriage of form and function.

So too, in life, we need to care about our bodies, our work, our
education: but it is an indirect caring, as these are means to the
realization of our soul's ascent. It cannot be achieved through not
caring about the world, but by relegating the world's importance to its
relative value.

But even this can go too far: Are we to regard the people we meet as
merely our stepping stones on the path to God? Such insincerity is not
what other hearts are looking for.

It strikes me as a delicate virtue, like a fine blade, that can cut
before you realize your finger is lost.
