:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       762E692E-914D-43D0-8183-4CE8FC3A6A53
:SLUG:     its-all-a-game
:END:
#+filetags: :journal:
#+title: It's all a game

Again, I am immersed in the world of fantasy role-playing games, this
time as a human mage in the [[http://worldofwarcraft.com][World of
Warcraft]].

As much an amusement as a means for reflection, many things have
happened in the game which have prompted me to reconsider real life.
There really is a lot in common between the two -- though it may not
seem so at first. I've written before on this idea,
[[file:the.game.of.life][the game of life]], but this time I've found
even more things to ponder.

For example, one day, as I was adventuring around, I found a really cool
shield. Well, it seemed cool back then, when my character was only
seventh level. And since I'm a mage, and can't use shields, I looked at
it in terms of its selling price: a whopping four silvers. At the time
this was almost a quarter of what I had.

Suddenly I faced a dilemma. Should I sell this great shield, or find a
worthy fighter or paladin to give it to? He would love it, considering
all the magical benefits it accrues to its wielder. Or I could trade it
in for four silvers, greatly increasing my own wealth. What to do, what
to do...

As I reflected on my choice, a thought occurred to me: very soon I will
stop playing this game altogether, and on that day, I won't care
anything whatever for the wealth my character has. What can gold or
silver mean in a game you no longer play? And when I give up all my
possessions that future day, four silvers will mean nothing to me at
all. I doubt I will look back and wish I had kept those silvers. I won't
even remember them. But if I give away my shield to a deserving player,
I'll be glad for doing so even beyond the game.

It was like having a vision of how my choice today would look to my
future self. So I gave away the shield. Nowadays my character has about
11,000 silvers, and the matter of four silvers then or now would have
made no difference to me at all. Had I kept the money or given it way,
things today would be the same. I'm very glad I gifted that shield to
someone else back then; even giving it away now would mean nothing to
me. It was the effect of the choice, as much as the choice itself, that
had value.

All of this made me think: isn't real life that way too? Isn't a day
fast-approaching when all of our possessions will mean nothing to us at
all, but the choices we made will mean all? On that day, I'll not wish I
had saved more money -- then, all amounts will equal the same
nothingness -- but I shall be very glad for every time I chose to help
my friends, or valued my time over spending it to make more money.

So as time went on in the game, I gave away an entire gold piece -- when
it meant half of everything I had; and then five gold; then twenty; even
one day giving away 40 gold and reducing myself to poverty! All to prove
a point to myself: that truly, it was worthless; nothing had meaning in
the game but playing it -- both as a way to enjoy myself and to spend
time connecting with others. And sure enough, not one week after my
self-imposed poverty, I was back to over a hundred gold and earning it
faster than I could spend it. The question of amounts never mattered at
all! But I could have easily gotten too caught up in quantities, and
missed the quality of such an easy freedom, assured that money will be
there whenever I need it.

Does this really relate to real life? In fact, it does. I've carried out
this experiment before, but it took these events to remind me of it. I
recall once trying so hard to save up money, spending half a year
scrimping and socking away every dollar, just to reach a certain amount.
And then in a moment of complete abandon I gave it all away, everything
I had accumulated over those six months. And what happened next? All of
it and more was replaced within a month or two. I'm still not sure how
it happened; not caring and not trying so hard, generated more wealth
for me than bending my back. And at times when I'm not working, it's not
that I earn so much, just that what I need is there by the time I need
it.

I've found it to be a general truth that the watched pot really doesn't
boil as fast, at least not in terms of our experience of time. It's like
the tortoise and the hare: those in no hurry reach the end just as
easily, while enjoying the scenery.

It's about enjoying the game -- the experience -- not sweating the
details. Warcraft and my young mage are teaching me this again, and life
has shown it to me several times. It's all a game; and the player who
wins best is the one who's had the best time playing it.
