:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       4E803946-703A-423E-BD09-CE78D03E54D6
:SLUG:     beloved-of-him
:LOCATION: 239 Misty Creek Dr, Monument, CO
:END:
#+filetags: :journal:
#+title: Beloved of Him

It strikes me that the private destiny of each individual is something
other than achieving the perfections he imagines for himself.

My first clue to this has been the fact that I've yet to meet a single
person -- of any age or level of achievement -- who believes they
deserve Heaven on their own merit. That is, if such were the measure of
spiritual success, I have found none who would grant themselves that
reward.

How can it be fair that we remain perpetually undeserving? One of the
most widespread issues I encounter is people believing they are not good
enough, that they do not deserve happiness in life. This mentality
presents a very specific picture: That things begin in a crude state,
and since this crude state must be overcome to enter a perfected state,
only those efforts which bend the crude toward the perfected are
acceptable. Anything else is "sin", an opportunity for advancement
missed, a betrayal of promise.

However, something in our nature rebels against this philosophy. We know
that a joyful condition is better than sorrow; we see how an hour spent
in joy can yield ten times its output in work. Even adults at a regular
job requires breaks and diversions, lest the mind become dull.

If I put this aside for a moment: perhaps Heaven desires something other
than completeness; an aspect of what we're given -- rather than what we
acquire -- as our key to that Place.

This became clearer for me recently because of a very strong dream. It
made such an impression on me, during the dream itself, that for several
dreams afterward I found myself telling different characters about what
I had heard, repeating it to myself so I would remember it after I
awoke.

I was in a terribly dangerous swamp. There were traps everywhere, and
all kinds of fatal mistakes to be made. There were dinosaurs, and huge
crocodiles, and deadly plants.

Somehow, in the middle of it all sitting on a log, was God, in the form
of the actor Alan Rickman (I'd just seen the wonderful movie, "Something
the Lord Made", whose title itself is a commentary on what I learned).
Anyway, when I walked up to God, He said that there was only one way to
escape from my predicament and enter a better place. I asked, "What's
that?" He said, "You must bring Me something I do not already have."

I thought about His request for a while and came up with several ideas:
love, happiness, independence, virtue, etc. But I could tell that none
of these were close to the mark. Then it hit me -- I could tell by the
feeling which came over me that I had found the right answer. It was: my
limitations. My limited nature was the one thing God did not possess for
Himself; and to offer this to Him was the reason I'd been created. Alan
just smiled, and the dream moved on to another.

After I woke up, the realization didn't seem quite as intense or
special, but it left me with a gnawing sense there was something behind
it. That is, it's not so much the perfections I develop in this life
which matter -- such as becoming knowledgable, skilled, or accomplished
-- but the depth of my appreciation for my limits. To the extent that I
discover within them a special beauty. It's like that saying where the
greatest strength is knowledge of one's weaknesses.

This put me in mind of a prayer by Bahá'u'lláh, where He writes:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
... Thou hast ordained that the utmost limit to which they who lift
their hearts to Thee can rise is the confession of their powerlessness
to enter the realms of Thy holy and transcendent unity, and that the
highest station which they who aspire to know Thee can reach is the
acknowledgment of their impotence to attain the retreats of Thy sublime
knowledge...

#+END_QUOTE
