:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       C12E0ABB-4F02-4BF8-817F-B0A95040F8FA
:SLUG:     finding-the-key
:END:
---
title: Finding the key
tags: journal
location: Nasim's house, 239 Misty Creek Drive, Monument, Colorado
---

A few days ago I wrote that the essence of morality lies in valuing
life, since we tend to do right by what we care about most -- which is
another way of saying that real morality starts with love. But while
this describes the what, it does not address the how. Where does our
sense of value come from? How can we value ourselves more -- as the
basis of integrity -- when self-loathing is so much the norm?

What makes it even more difficult is a principle I've noticed in my own
nature, and which I believe to be universal: that love cannot be
governed by will. We simply do not choose our interests.

This principle would seem to suggest that morality is not a matter of
choice -- but that isn't quite what I mean. A better way to put it is
that one cannot develop his morality directly. Any attempt to do so
involves duplicity, as we start patterning our actions differently from
our interests. We do one thing, but in our hearts we want to do another.
Yet the morality I dream of begins in the heart, not in the mind; it
does not require an inner conflict -- since I believe love cannot be
fostered by any kind of violence.

This means that true morality -- which proceeds from one's inward being
-- must be developed indirectly. There is another variable we /can/
tweak, and which /is/ subject to our will. And if our heart is driven by
what we love most, this variable must be: to look deeper into the nature
of things, until we discover a more universal love.

First of all, it strikes me as very odd that we cannot choose what we
love. Love is such an amazing source of energy and motivation -- it
allows us at times to completely transcend our limitations. A person in
love is devoted to his object; he draws on reservoirs of energy that the
will has no access to. Love, in effect, ignites our being and makes our
potential come alive.

It's almost as if human beings are a kind of appliance: once we find the
right socket to plug into, everything changes. We enter a new realm of
being. I think we were designed to operate on this level, and that the
meager energies we possess without it are only there to help us to get
there.

Once we encounter this torrent of love, it is in our interest to channel
and heighten the experience, much like focusing light into a beam. Only
if a person is unaware that this can be achieved does he ignore it.
Otherwise, why content one's self with less, when more can be had? If we
know the first level of something is good, and the second level is
better, who will not reach for it if he knows it's close?

That is the role of morality, I believe: a set of guidelines to enhance
our connection to love. Take the morality of an engineer. He uses math
and measurement to decide whether a certain design is "good" or not. He
defines goodness by the fitness of the end product; but only if cares
about that product will he strive to use the guidelines to their utmost;
only if cares can they act to enhance his connection through the
perfection of the final result. And when it's done, and done well, he
will experience the joy of using it for its intended purpose. In this
way, the refinement of his actions bonds him with his goal.

Since morality is aimed at the beloved, we need to see our goal clearly
in order to make proper use of what is moral. The variable we can
control is our vision. What is it that we want? Have we looked
everywhere to find it?

For example, a person may look for someone to deeply love, but will
alone cannot manifest that person, not even among those he knows, since
will-power does not determine love -- and without love there is no basis
for that kind of relationship. He may act (pretend morality) toward
someone he knows, as if doing so will create what he seeks, but this is
a lie. In order for genuine actions of love to appear (real morality),
the beloved must be found. Since love cannot be changed, what he must do
is to seek out more people -- to increase his vision by discovering more
possibilities. Doing this is well within his power, and only by
operating at that level can he ever hope to act honestly as one in love.

I think spiritual morality is no different. We possess a set of
guidelines for living whose purpose can only be reasonably defined in
terms of the Beloved. Without that essential piece, they are just
actions serving as an end in themselves. Find the Beloved, however, and
they become extremely pragmatic, being most effective ways for us to
gain closer proximity.

So the "how", from all of this, is in effect education: to sharpen our
vision; see more clearly, more deeply, more broadly. There exist certain
things, revealed in nature -- whether it be objects, people, ideas,
feelings -- that are able to engender a spontaneous, radical response in
the human spirit. Morality comes into play both at the beginning to help
us find it, and afterwards to draw us nearer.

Furthermore, I believe -- from reading certain mystical texts -- that
the whole of life is much more than we take it to be. In this sense,
education means unwrapping the veils that obscure its true nature, until
we find that the Beloved is all. Which is also the only way that human
beings can ever act morally towards all with honesty.
