:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       7F6969DB-73F7-4566-9F0A-79245FF077AA
:SLUG:     spirit-and-thought
:END:
---
title: Spirit and thought
tags: journal
---

The following idea came up during a discussion this week. We were
reading a quote that said "at the hour of the soul's separation from the
body", and someone asked how could the soul separate from the if it's
not really in the body, but only associated with it. Why would the
Writings use the term separation?

#+begin_html
  <!--more-->
#+end_html

It occurred to me that in some ways, the process of thinking is a lot
like spiritual life.

For example, a potent thought usually begins with a moment of
inspiration. In that moment we feel an intuition that there is much to
discover in the idea, though the majority of its content is hidden, and
potential. We may not have words to describe it at first, but it doesn't
stop us from feeling a sense of this potential, stirring inside. This is
not unlike the dawning of spiritual life in an individual, who senses
there are things unseeen but who can't put words to any of them. It's a
feeling of being "pregnant with possibility" -- an intuition of an
unseen door, waiting to be found and opened.

The next step to developing a thought is to clarify it, distill it, and
distinguish what is true and universal about the idea from what is
fanciful and strictly personal. At this stage, the idea is very much
colored by the attitudes of the thinker; it is enmeshed in his
personality, so to speak. Some never pass beyond this point. They pursue
the idea for gain only, and so it gets caught up in the thinker's
desires and agenda. If the thought carries on too far like this, it may
actually perish, because its inner truth is never discovered.

Take Einsten's theory of relativity, for example. I know that many
scientists around the same time had similar ideas, but let's assume
Einstein came up with the core idea that the passage of time relates to
acceleration. For many years, this idea would have been seen as
"Einstein's fantasy". Sure, time is variable; right... But what Einstein
did is to keep working on the idea, purifying it, clarifying it,
extracting from it certain core essentials that had nothing to do with
Einstein, but strictly to do with space and time. The result was a set
of ideas that were independently provable, and once proven, Einstein's
idea truly began a life of its own.

One could say that at this stage, when the idea was proven and the
equations were justified, it "separated" from the mind of Einstein. The
pregnant intuition he had received as a patent clerk was laboriously
purified until it became something universal and completely apart to his
private dreams and wishes.

I think this might be part of what spiritual life is about. Our soul is
given to us like an "in-spir-ation", a breath of Life breathed into a
physical form. Initially, it's wholly bound up in our private hopes and
goals. But there are eternal truths to this spirit as well, properties
that have nothing to do with the individual. Trustworthiness, for
example, is the same no matter who displays it. I don't know if the
reader has had a direct experience of trustworthiness, but I find it
other-worldly. The same is true of honor, honesty, and compassion. In
their purest form they seem to shine of their own light, and while that
light may be colored by the act and actor, its essence is universal.

As with an idea, I think our task is to purify and rarify the spiritual
reality within us, until it takes on its universal aspects. And just as
when an idea leaves the confines of the mind who imagined it, I think
that when our spirit becomes universal, it likewise leaves the confines
of the personality who engendered it.

Which is not to say that a thought leaving destroys the mind, or that
our personality must disappear. In fact, when a mind has birthed a great
thought, it too enjoys the fruit of it, and even moreso participation in
its development. And I think that our individuality -- the carrier of
spirituality -- continues to have a "relationship" with the pure spirit
we're capable of manifesting.

To put it another way: if you burnish a mirror, the light becomes
clearer and brighter. At first the light illimunes the dross on the
mirror, but as the mirror becomes purified, the same light "leaves" the
mirror and now enters the eye, causing its original form to be seen by
the viewer. Otherwise, the dross in a way holds the light, interrupting
its reflective journey onward.

So I may not be strictly "thinking" when I pursue a spiritual life, but
perhaps the act has a similar form. In this way, I am the crucible and
the flame, reducing to its finest product an infinitely rich ore. We
were reading a quote that said “at the hour of the soul's separation
from the body”, and someone asked how could the soul separate from the
if it's not really in the body, but only associated with it.

...I know that many scientists around the same time had similar ideas,
but let's assume Einstein came up with the core idea that the passage of
time relates to acceleration. ... Sure, time is variable; right... But
what Einstein did is to keep working on the idea, purifying it,
clarifying it, extracting from it certain core essentials that had
nothing to do with Einstein, but strictly to do with space and time.

...At first the light illimunes the dross on the mirror, but as the
mirror becomes purified, the same light “leaves” the mirror and now
enters the eye, causing its original form to be seen by the viewer.
