:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       40140F46-575D-49C0-A3CB-5731A613BBA2
:SLUG:     the-prisoner
:END:
#+filetags: :journal:
#+title: The prisoner

Our eye is a prisoner, trapped by the limits of its very function. It
perceives only the barest fraction of the electromagnetic spectrum --
indeed, must limit itself to remain sensitive. But there is so much else
out there, so much more to the "bigger picture" of the universe. We see
only the barest fraction of it.

In past times, the invisible wavelengths were unknown to exist:
ultraviolet, infrared, gamma rays and x-rays. In some cases their
effects were felt. People knew to get out of the sun, but they didn't
understand why they burned. They ascribed the cause of sunburn to
something else, like heat, without answering why plants and animals
don't also burn.

The mind is able to free the eye from its prison. Through understanding,
experiment and the application of reason, we discovered the whole
spectrum of energy and can now train ourselves to see with a clearer
sight than merely what the eye will allow.

But what can free the mind from the prison of its own conceptions? What
if there is a larger world at play, whose effects also touch human
lives, but whose cause is not readily accessible to inquiry or argument?
Despite the amazing accuracy of science, it leaves wholly unanswered the
question of love, purpose, fulfillment. Like skin left in the sun, we
feel anguish in places no probe can reach, with any reasons given
leading to more questions unanswered than addressed.

One of our extra capacities is faith: that even if snomething is wholly
imperceptible, yet it may exist. When the Old World did not believe in
the American continent, and instead believed the world was flat, it did
not mean that other cultures were not rising and falling here, even
though it had little perceptible impact on the rest of the globe.

What if the effects of another world are happening here every day, which
we discount because the mind has no answers? Like: dreams, inspiration,
miracles, or those Who call themselves the Prophets of God. What if all
of these are evidences of the influence of another world, but the mind
in its prison is incapable of perceiving of them as such?

If the mind is our highest value -- if it can offer happiness,
fulfillment, and a better future for mankind -- then it deserves to lead
us. But I don't think it can. I think that, like the eyes, it is an
organ of perception that can no more offer us meaning than it can see
beyond its own limits. We certainly /know/ about happiness, but to go
out and find it still eludes even some of the most brilliant people.

Meanwhile, faith can take us places that reason cannot. Faith can follow
dreams which to every mind seem impossible, but that in the end come
true. Perhaps faith is our doorway to freedom, and beyond this door our
destiny lies.
