:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       F7042BB4-123A-4173-9D07-E3A7F94A4CDA
:SLUG:     vision-and-the-architect
:END:
---
title: Vision and the architect (2 of 3)
tags: journal
---

What I'd like to examine next is how different types of people relate to
the hidden concept of oakness, at varying levels of abstraction. There
are three principle figures in this drama: the orchard keeper, or
farmer; the carpenter; and the architect.

The oak farmer is the one most immediately connected to the oak trees
themselves. He sees them all develop from seed to tree, and is aware of
the unique characteristics of each. He may see one as better, or another
less, and he may even have a favorite tree.

Due to his long familiarity with the trees, the farmer will likely have
an excellent understanding of oakness, but he will know it in the form
of its many manifestations. That is, when he thinks of an "oak", he will
have in mind a particular tree, or a sapling, or a seed. His
relationship to oakness is through the oaks themselves.

A carpenter, on the other hand, relates to oaks in terms of their
usefulness as a material for construction. He receives the wood in the
form of planks and beams, and is aware of things like weight and grain,
hardness and strength. It may be said that he has passed beyond the tree
and kens their virtue only. And yet, despite this enormous leap from
manifestation toward virtue, still the carpenter is bound to the
physical qualities of each particular piece of wood. He knows what the
wood is meant for, but must consider the fitfulness of each individual
specimen. He is, in this sense, between the worlds.

Lastly there is the architect. When he envisions a building, and decides
to use oak in its production, he thinks purely in terms of the virtues
of oak. He ignores the variable properties of the actual pieces and
holds in mind an ideal piece, which he then assumes the farmer will
produce and the carpenter will find for him. He is free in this sense
from the actual, physical manifestations, and communes in his mind with
their common properties. To him, all oaks of a certain kind are really
one oak, and the progression from seed to tree is an irrelevant detail.
Oakness is distilled to its purest virtues and the rest is cast away.

These three archetypes relate to the wayfarer's journey in that he seeks
to move from a comprehension of God's attributes in the world of being,
toward a vision of that inner quality which informs those attributes
with their essence, until he realizes an inner communion with the
Reality those attributes and that quality refer to. He too begins in the
realm of limitation, wherein he knows God only through the Seen, His
many names. Then his hunger propels him faster and faster through the
valley of love until he attains a knowledge of that which unites those
plural manifestations. Armed with this insight he blinds himself more
and more from the distracting nature of the world's distinctions until
to him it has but one purpose, one redeeming virtue: the knowledge of
Him.
