:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       2F2B19E7-D7ED-4A3A-84FA-EB84928C3E23
:SLUG:     origins-of-the-self
:END:
---
title: Origins of the self
tags: journal
---

The following is just a collection of thoughts inspired from readings in
philosophy, and the Seven Valleys:

It would seem that "self" is born in the early stages of life, when we
first witness our process of awareness and imagine there must be another
entity, abstract and apart from the immediate experience of life, which
monitors this action. Although this is merely an idea, it can seem real
enough, almost as though we are driving our reality the way a
camel-driver might.

Meanwhile, our only reality is our soul, which thrives on love and seeks
to experience God's love through the medium of experience. In the most
advanced stages, "He will discover in all things the mysteries of Divine
Revelation...", yet this pellucid insight is obscured by the self, which
by the time of adulthood has cast such a thick veil of labels and vain
imaginings over the Real, that we may feel utterly remote from God at
the beginning of our spiritual journey.

The self thrives on will, because the illusion that our choices affect
the world is a powerful argument for the self's reality. Never mind that
between thought and action there is a gap we can neither perceive nor
understand -- that "there is no power or might but in God". The self
constructs for itself a throne of self-determination and actualization.
While the soul dreams of nothing but the Ancient Beauty, the fantasy of
the self is one of repeatedly establishing its simplistic, ideational
dominion over the diverse, unfathomable nature of the real world.

The utility of self is that it causes us to experience a perception of
distance from God, and this leads us to hunger for reunion. No feast is
greater than the relish one experiences after a prolonged fast. In this
way, the self is like a lens, bringing into bas relief the experiences
of the soul, until we come to know God indirectly through the medium of
what He is not, that we may more fully acknowledge Who He is.

An obedient self can assist us by applying will in directions it
believes will benefit the soul. Truly, it should strive to desire no
will but the Will of God. However, self is not necessary for the soul's
experience of God. I see it like a kind of womb of deeper consciousness:
it abstracts us from the real world, artifically separating us from our
goal, but in so doing it educates us in the ways of thirst, hunger and
longing -- that is, if we are finally birthed in faith, and the caul of
self removed.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
How can a true lover continue to exist when once the effulgent glories
of the Beloved are revealed? How can the shadow endure when once the sun
hath shone forth? How can a devoted heart have any being before the
existence of the Object of its devotion? Nay, by the One in Whose hand
is my soul! In this station, the seeker's complete surrender and utter
effacement before his Creator will be such that, were he to search the
East and the West, and traverse land, sea, mountain and plain, he would
find no trace of his own self or of any other soul. [Gems, pp.70-71]

#+END_QUOTE

The self desires power, because this alone is the foundation of its
seeming existence. It seeks power through knowledge, skill, achievement,
reputation, or any method which establishes it as an entity to be
regarded. In a way, it strives to be a mini-God, wanting to imitate some
measure of His power, wisdom, etc. Yet in the Writings there is a
reiterated theme of our powerlessness, poverity, lowliness and
sinfulness; and this is not a pitiful station, but part of the gift of
God. Bahá'u'lláh declares: "I, therefore, beseech Thee, by this very
powerlessness which is beloved of Thee, and which Thou hast decreed as
the goal of them that have reached and attained Thy court..."

We are meant to recognize the truth of our station, and I believe self
has no part in this. For if at any moment you look around at what is --
without the idea of what things are, without the interposition of human
conceptions and limits -- all that is left, really, is mystery. Even
science has admitted that it knows nothing about what the world is, only
how it appears to behave with respect to the questions we ask of it. The
real fabric of things is unknowable, yet our soul can have its own
association. `Abdu'l-Bahá writes, in His tablet to August Forel:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
The mind comprehendeth the abstract by the aid of the concrete, but the
soul hath limitless manifestations of its own. The mind is
circumscribed, the soul limitless. It is by the aid of such senses as
those of sight, hearing, taste, smell and touch, that the mind
comprehendeth, whereas the soul is free from all agencies....

#+END_QUOTE

We look at a teapot and say, "This is a teapot", but in fact it is
something that serves, for all intents and purposes, as a teapot. To say
it "is" a teapot is where I believe the self leads us astray. There is
certainly utility in the idea of a teapot, and I am not disputing this.
But we cannot know the true nature of things without the soul, and to
the soul, it is all a Manifestation of the Divine. It could be at once a
teapot, a symbol of the divine reality, a sign, a mystic confirmation, a
harbinger. We know for certain it reveals at least one of the attributes
of God, and that all things are mentioned in the Book of God. What was
it before? What will it be after? Aren't these states also part of the
truth of what it is? In Zen, the being of a thing is even bound up in
all the things related to it, such as the teacup, the tea, the drinker
and the server.

What I mean is that the self takes snapshots of the world, and then
looks them over in its mental scrapbook as if truly knows the place. The
soul, on the other hand, knows a thing by experiencing it. It does not
want to believe in God, it wants to be with God, always, at every
moment. A lover is not content with only letters; paper and ink are no
substitute for her hand, her laughter. Every idea we have of God leads
us astray. Blinded men, in the depths of a cave, can make no meaningful
statements about light. Even if they founded their ideas on the sayings
of men from the surface, they have only made sense out of words. Without
sight, and a ray of the Sun to reach them, no amount of knowledge will
ever bring them closer. Their souls remain trapped in their bodies as
long as they dwell in that shadow-land.

But if they make their way up, and witness the light, it is not a word,
or an idea, but a brightness that burns the eye with its truth. This is
the difference, to me, between self and soul: the self seeks to know a
thing by bringing it into its own domain; the soul knows a thing by
beholding it. Thus the spiritual journey is one of seeking purity,
clarity, humility, and self-honesty; it is not so much development, as
devolving back to that time before the self began telling us what things
were.
