:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       BA90D0E5-2170-4DBC-9F5C-B26C5E74DC09
:SLUG:     the-hidden-door
:END:
---
title: The hidden door
tags: journal
---

[Today's entry is a re-post of something I posted in 2004, but that was
accidentally deleted from the server afterwards during an upgrade.]

If God is all that is good, and a perfect Creator, how could He make
something bad? How can things like sorrow and misery be real, if all was
created from good?

If all is good, perhaps we fail to see it because time and space put
blinders on our perception. We see only a limited part, a sliver of a
moving whole -- all of which is good, even if one part seems disjoint
from that theme. The "whole picture" cannot be stopped or divided, and
still be seen. It includes all the movements of reality, so cannot be
frozen; it comprises every element, so cannot be separated without
appearing as other than what it is, which is perfect -- if indeed it was
created by a good and perfect Creator.

#+begin_html
  <!--more-->
#+end_html

What limits and divides our perception are ideas. They abstract from the
All certain parts, to allow us to interact with those parts
individually. But as long as our consciousness founds itself in ideas,
we fail to perceive what lies outside them. Like the eye's ability to
focus, which must pick out certain parts from a whole field, in order to
"know" things we contrast them with other "things". Contrast and
distinction make up our awareness, but they also blind us to the All.

There is an exit to this paradox: The knowledge of things through
contrast /itself/ contrasts with the nature of the All. Our method of
awareness can lead to an awareness of what lies outside it! Through this
leap, we may be able to see things without knowing them as "things". Our
awareness is able to transcend the requirements of awareness. Thus
contrast, which makes observation of the All impossible, can permit us
to become aware of the All. It is like a hidden doorway into a different
world.

For the remainder of this essay, I refer to operations outside the
scheme of ideas as /knowing/ and /seeing/, with the idea that /knowing/
follows from realizing the incapacity of knowledge -- and what it is
incapable in regards to -- and /seeing/ comes from abandoning the
futility of sight for the same reason.

Since ideas divide reality, it is they that distinguish "good" from
"bad". They make the All appear to contain these two attributes, which
appear when we look at one part in exclusion from the rest. Since the
All was created by a good and perfect Creator, the nature of the All
must be only good -- and perfect good -- so that ideas allow us to see
only "somewhat good" and "somewhat bad" on a sliding scale. In fact,
since the underlying reality is only perfect good, what ideas see are
merely differentiated values of good from lesser to greater extent.
There is no "bad" per se: what we call "bad" is an arbitrary line drawn
on the gradient between the least perceived good and the most perceived
good. Then each definition of good and bad relates to the perceiver,
because each draws that line differently.

This gradient exists only for ideas. If we did not see with ideas, not
only would our sight be undifferentiated, but we would /see/ only the
underlying, perfect good. Thus if "joy" is what attends our experience
of the good, and sadness of the bad, then once we /see/ there can be no
more sadness, as "bad" no longer has meaning. Sorrow was never real --
since the underlying reality is perfect good -- it was simply the
perceived form of our deficiency of understanding. Once there is
/knowledge/, sorrow can no longer be. This accords with a statement
found in the Bahá'í writings:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
This is a station which, wert thou to attain unto it, thou wouldst
arrive at a happiness which would not be followed by sadness, a joy
which is not succeeded by grief, an ease and comfort that does not end
in distress and hardship, a prosperity that does not turn to destitution
and misfortune, for the might of thy Lord has grasped firmly the reins
of affairs.[fn:1]

#+END_QUOTE

And also here:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
The wayfarer in this Valley [of Knowledge] seeth in the fashionings of
the True One nothing save clear providence, and at every moment saith:
"No defect canst thou see in the creation of the God of Mercy: Repeat
the gaze: Seest thou a single flaw?" He beholdeth justice in injustice,
and in justice, grace. In ignorance he findeth many a knowledge hidden,
and in knowledge a myriad wisdoms manifest.[fn:2]

#+END_QUOTE

If /seeing/ leads to an experience of life which is only good, perhaps
the purpose of sight through ideas is to lead us to /sight/. In other
words, the nature of the world we first experience, through ignorance,
exists in order for us to become truly aware. Without that first,
deficient awareness, we could not become /aware/ of what such awareness
cannot approach. The fundamental paradox of contrast must resolve itself
for the circle to close in a conscious way.

To say it again: The purpose of the world of seeming, with its mixture
of "good" and "bad", "joy" and "sorrow", is to offer a hidden door, on
the other side of which is a true /awareness/ of the Good -- an
awareness fundamentally different from what we started with. It's like
teaching a baby how to use a muscle, which can only be learned from the
exercise of it. In this way I understand the tradition:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
"O my Lord, how shall we reach unto Thee?" And the answer came, "Leave
thyself behind, and then approach Me."[fn:3]

#+END_QUOTE

That is, in order to exit the world of ideas we must learn to leave them
behind, foremost among which is "self".

How to find this door and achieve /sight/? Well, an element exists to
religion which is all about learning to see what doesn't appear to be
there, such as seeing good in the bad that happens to us: Faith. Faith
believes that the reality it fails to see is more real than what it does
see. It suggests that what we think exists perhaps doesn't exist at all.
And faith develops, not by adding to an ever-growing store of ideas, but
by weakening their hold on us through various exercises, such as:
detachment, meditation, regarding our strength as weakness and our
wealth as poverty, lessening our love of "self", etc. All of these
aspects of religion aim at making the door to the All visible. I even
think now that all of religion aims at this on the personal and social
scale, that from this goal are born all its laws and institutions. Only
when they depart from this objective, of truly awakening man to the
perfect joy of /knowing/ God, do they go astray.

Concerning the world beyond the door, because division cannot comprehend
it, concepts must regard it as a single reality. Although that world
exists within this world -- beyond the veil of ideas -- it cannot be
perceived except by /seeing/ it. As Lao Tzu put it, "Looked at, it
cannot be seen." A man in this realm might use concepts, but he no
longer sees in terms of them. In order to /know/, he gives up knowledge.
When hungry he might look for food, but he no longer knows what "hunger"
and "food" are. "Thus is it said, `Absolute unity excludeth all
attributes.'"

The world beyond the door is not just a cause for undimmed joy, it is
the very meaning of joy: to know the good. To such a degree that what we
call "joy" is but a shadow of the truth. Everything in this "world" is a
shadow cast from that world, along a gradient from light to dark. The
perfect good is reflected as "good" and "bad", perfect joy is reflected
as "joy" and "sorrow", and every other kind of perfection is seen here
as more or less imperfect.

The real world is kept from us, not by the barrier of physical death,
but the death of our "selves" who hold so dearly to the illusory world
of concepts. The true reality, unlimited by time or space, /is/ the
world. All failure, impermanence, and insecurity arise from the way we
see it, or how our "first awareness" divides and separates it. What we
call "flawed" is in fact perfect, and what we call "impermanent" is
essentially eternal. It only seems otherwise. And thus, by transcending
the limits of our vision, our souls may enter the heaven intended for
them, which has been here with us all along.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Strive then, O My brother, to apprehend this matter, that the veils may
be lifted from the face of thy heart and that thou mayest be reckoned
among them whom God hath graced with such penetrating vision as to
behold the most subtle realities of His dominion, to fathom the
mysteries of His kingdom, to perceive the signs of His transcendent
Essence in this mortal world, and to attain a station wherein one seeth
no distinction amongst His creatures and findeth no flaw in the creation
of the heavens and the earth.[fn:4]

#+END_QUOTE

[fn:1] This comes from an unpublished and unauthorized translation of a
       commentary by `Abdu'l-Bahá. I do have the original, however, but
       still have yet to make my own translation.

[fn:2] Bahá'u'lláh, The Seven Valleys

[fn:3] Bahá'u'lláh, The Four Valleys

[fn:4] Bahá'u'lláh, Gems of Divine Mysteries
