:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       23E66842-3CB7-4163-9B63-911894BE9BC7
:SLUG:     the-four-valleys-again
:END:
---
title: The Four Valleys again
tags: journal
---

At the end of the Seven Valleys, Bahá'u'lláh makes a statement about the
furthering journeys of the spiritual wayfarer:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
They who soar in the heaven of singleness and reach to the sea of the
Absolute, reckon this city -- which is the station of life in God -- as
the furthermost state of mystic knowers, and the farthest homeland of
the lovers. But to this evanescent One of the mystic ocean, this station
is the first gate of the heart's citadel, that is, man's first entrance
to the city of the heart; and the heart is endowed with four stages,
which would be recounted should a kindred soul be found.[^1]

#+END_QUOTE

Several authors have concluded that since Bahá'u'lláh wrote another
text, titled the Four Valleys, not long after revealing the Seven
Valleys, that this shorter book must be the missing presentation of the
aforementioned "four stages of the heart". However, it is my thought
that this book considers a different theme than the Seven Valleys, and
makes a separate, though related, point.

First, some background is necessary. Both of these books was written to
a Sufi recipient, and uses the language of their mystical schools. Among
that vocabulary lies a precise distinction between two stages of the
soul's progress toward its Creator: the journey "to" God, which begins
with birth into this world; and the journey "in" God, which begins once
that is completed. The pivot between these journeys is when the soul
reaches the station of baqá, or eternal subsistence in God:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
[T]he stations that follow (baqá, subsistence] may be said to be so many
stations in the journey in God (fi'lláh) after the traveler has ended
the journey to God (ila'lláh).[fn:1]

#+END_QUOTE

Bahá'u'lláh states that the seventh valley -- Absolute Poverty and Truth
Nothingness -- marks the moment when the believer enters into the
station of baqá:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
This station (maqám) is the dying from self (faná' az nafs) and the
living in God (baqá' bi'lláh).

#+END_QUOTE

Another way to regard this transition is that the seeker ceases the task
of searching after God, and commences a process of ever-deepening
discovery.

In Gems of Divine Mysteries, which offers a description of spiritual
progression comparable to the Seven Valleys, there is a depiction of two
valleys beyond that of Nothingness (faná). As might be expected, the
first of these valleys is the City of Immortality, which in Arabic is
the "city of baqá":

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
From this most august and exalted station, and from this most sublime
and glorious plane, the seeker entereth the City of Immortality
(madínatu'l-baqá), therein to abide forever (`apalá'u'l-baqá).

#+END_QUOTE

The reason I point out the pivotal nature of achieving baqá is that the
Four Valleys is notably absent any mention of the subject. In fact, many
of its statements concern aspects of the journey to God, and not the
journey in God. For example:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
[First Valley]: Although at the beginning, this plane is the realm of
conflict (jidál), yet it endeth in attainment to the throne of splendor.

#+END_QUOTE

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
#+END_QUOTE

In both of these statement, the wayfarer suffers torments which arise
from the station of limitation (tahdíd), something which those who have
realized the Divine Unity (tawhíd) are well beyond. Compare this with
the station of Unity as described in Gems of Divine Mysteries:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
They that dwell within this Ocean, they that ride upon this Ark, witness
no change in the creation of God and behold no differences upon His
earth.

#+END_QUOTE

How can one who has passed beyond Unity, and beyond Immortality, later
be found in the "realm of conflict" or among those who "meeteth with
many a trial and reverse"? Yet if the Four Valleys is placed after the
Seven Valleys in sequence, this is exactly what is implied.

So what are the Four Valleys, and what is their intent? I do not believe
its message is identical with that of the Seven Valleys at all. Whereas
the Seven Valleys, and Gems of Divine Mysteries, recounts the soul's
progress through degrees in the journey toward God, the Four Valleys
depicts alternates ways this journey may be conducted. And while it may
appear that each method is more perfect than the last, they are all
acceptable in the sight of God. This idea of "alternate fulfillment" is
found also in the Hidden Words:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
O Son of Man! Write all that We have revealed unto thee with the ink of
light upon the tablet of thy spirit. Should this not be in thy power,
then make thine ink of the essence of thy heart. If this thou canst not
do, then write with that crimson ink that hath been shed in My path...

#+END_QUOTE

[fn:1] Nasr, Seyyed Hossain. (1991). Sufi Essays. Albany, NY: State
       University of New York Press, p.82.
