:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       8B434C5D-111D-41B5-AED4-94E3F8F33EB6
:SLUG:     beginning-and-end
:END:
#+filetags: :essays:
#+title: The beginning and the end

There is a recurring theme in the Writings, both Islamic and Bahá'í, of
four divine states which are referred to in the verse: "He is the first
and the last, the Seen and the Hidden." It is also found in the New
Testament, where it says "I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the
end, the first and the last."

Bahá'u'lláh expounds on this theme in the Valley of Unity, yet it is
also found in the Valley of Knowledge. In the story of the lover and his
beloved, the lover starts in the "world of the beginning". After he is
pursued by the watchmen, he comes upon his beloved and is transported to
the "world of the end".

These two worlds exist in the vision of the wayfarer. Between them is
the illusory reality of Time, through which men must pass. Owing to
these two worlds, change is witnessed. Because of them, the Prophets
appear to have different names, and speak in different tongues.
Otherwise, in the realm of unity, "This is the changeless Faith of God,
eternal in the past, eternal in the future."

Consider yourself in a difficult situation. Without knowing the outcome,
you may be seized by fear, or wonder at what may happen. You are in the
"world of firstness". In this condition "the end is veiled to you", and
people are wont "to make their pliant in the beginning."

After the passage of time, and the appearance of change, we learn the
outcome of our situation. We may be happy, or sad, but now things are
complete. We have entered "the world of lastness", and come to the end
of our waiting.

It is possible, through faith, and insight into the ways of God, to
perceive "the end in the beginning". That is, while dwelling in the
world of the first, it is as though we look across a gorge, and see the
details of the world of the last. We take heart in what we see, and our
apprehension of the unknown leaves us. Because God "[has] ordained for
thy training every atom in existence and the essence of all created
things", we come to perceive even the next life from the vantage point
of this life, and learn that everything which occurs materially is for
the benefit of spiritual progress. Thus the gap of death is bridged, and
we are filled with a spiritual joy that is beyond this world.

This is the station of those in the valley of Knowledge, and by such
insight the wayfarer can reach across the boundaries of Time. It is an
attribute of those who see the large in the small, the tree in the seed,
the future in the present. This is the last world of limitation, for
limitations require separation, and separation implies differences.

He says, "... the people of the Valleys above this see the end and the
beginning as one..." In this condition, the world of the beginning is
not different from the world of the end. Whatever situation we find
ourselves in, and however we may seem to other people, we are actually
dwelling in the world of the end, though our surroundings have the
appearance of the world of the beginning.

To give a concrete example of this: In the game of chess, players are
ranked according to their ability on a scale from 0 to 3000. The greater
the numerical separation between players, the greater the likelihood
that the higher player will win.

At a tournament, where people are playing to win, let's assume that you
are rated 3000, and your opponent is rated 0. This means that you have
no possibility of losing. Although no pieces have been moved, and you
sit in the world of the first, because of your certitude you already
count the game as won. You already experience the joys and emotions of
the world of the last. Indeed, no matter what apparent "changes" occur
on the board, they have no reality, and time in this case is just a
show.

Likewise for the other player. The end and the beginning are one, and
while we may see the players at the "beginning", they themselves already
dwell in the "end". They do not just see the end in the beginning; their
emotions, vision, and reality concerning the end and the beginning is
one.

This is the station of `Abdu'l-Bahá saying "The Temple is already
built." For Him, Who saw the condition of the believers at that time,
the Temple already existed in its full splendour. I imagine He was able
to revel in the creation of the believers, and experienced joy at what
they had/will build. Time was but a show, a non-thing. In the spiritual
worlds, the cornerstone and the Temple were one.

This implies a complete transcendence of the conditions of this life,
which seems so ruled by boundaries and temporal causation. It is no
wonder that Bahá'u'lláh said that the valley of Knowledge "is the last
plane of limitation". Here the spirit is free, and appearances no longer
affect it. Owing to the saying, "Verily we are from God, and to Him
shall we return", he sees the Face of God everywhere, for has he not
already returned? Bahá'u'lláh says, "... what life have words, on such a
plane, that =first' and=last' or other than these be seen or mentioned!
In this realm, the first is the last itself, and the last is but the
first."

He then continues, "Nay rather, the denizens of the undying city, who
dwell in the green garden land, see not even `neither first nor last';
they fly from all that is first, and repulse all that is last." In Gems
of the Mysteries, Bahá'u'lláh writes, "In this station change and
alteration are pure idolatry and unadulterated belief." In this realm of
the Infinite, change is not only unreal, it is uncreate. "Knowledge is a
single point, but the ignorant have multiplied it." Here there is no
believer, for as He said, "There was God and there was naught beside
Him". And further, "This is the plane whereon the vestiges of all things
are destroyed in the traveler, and on the horizon of eternity the Divine
Face riseth out of the darkness, and the meaning of 'All on the earth
shall pass away, but the face of thy Lord...' is made manifest."

Even love, which implies a lover, debars one from this realm, as it has
been said, "Love is a veil betwixt the lover and the loved one; more
than this I am not permitted to tell."
