:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       98059C31-A0DC-47D3-B1C5-50D11B8BEC5B
:SLUG:     musings-on-the-seven-valleys
:END:
#+filetags: :essays:
#+title: Musings on the Seven Valleys

Within the Seven Valleys, Bahá'u'lláh distinguishes three particular
stations, or maqámát: The station of limitation (tahdíd), comprising the
first three valleys; the station of unity (tawhíd), covering the next
three valleys; and the station of annihilation of self and eternity in
God (faná az nafs va baqá bi-lláh). In what follows, I'll talk in terms
of both these stations, and the Valleys that constitute them.

Bahá'u'lláh writes that the stages of the wayfarer's journey consist in
the progression of his vision: "Thus it hath been made clear that these
stages depend on the vision of the wayfarer." What is this a vision of?
My thought is just this: The Seven Valleys depicts the believer's
spiritual progression in terms of his capacity to recognize, accept, and
attach himself to the Manifestations of God.

In the station of limitation, the believer's relationship to the Ancient
Beauty consists of his awareness of the Being's manifestation at a
particular time, and in a particular society. That is, the individual
may have discovered the person of Christ, or Muhammad, or Bahá'u'lláh.

At this beginning, when the believer's journey has just begun, he is
searching. In order to recognize the Divine nature of the Manifestation,
he must put aside all cultural and intellectual understandings, whatever
might prejudice His perception of the qualitative difference between the
Writings and Person of the Manifestation of God, and those of ordinary
men.

Once he first recognizes the Object of his search, he instantly falls in
love with It, despite have no knowledge of the Beloved's depth and
subtleties. The concept of "love at first sight" does not require
knowledge of the one loved, and there are many stories of people falling
in love with each other before they have even learned each other's
names. So it is that a person might read the writings of the Báb, and
declare His undying belief on the spot, though He knows nothing else
about the Báb or the scope of His Mission.

Through love we attach ourselves to the one that we love, and hold on
despite the hardship and confusion that will result as our lives are
being turned upside down in the face of these transformative ideas. At
the same time, God puts to test those who claim to be His lovers: "Do
men think when they say `We believe' they shall be let alone and not be
put to proof?" The lover is the one who loves not only despite the pain,
but for whom pain is identifying with the joy of communion.

At last the lover acquires knowledge of the One he loves, and begins to
perceive the wholeness, and unity, and perfection of that Being. He sees
how all ideas are harmonized, how conflicting ideas express the same
meaning, and how the harshest of Laws is in fact a benefit. That is, he
perceives not only the Glory, but also the Wisdom, of the Manifestation
of God. If the word of the Manifestation begets war, this is in fact the
foundation of peace; in the wrath of God, he perceives the most sincere
friendship.

However, all of this transpires still within the realm of limitation,
because the believer has not yet transcended the particular to arrive at
the real truth of the Ancient Beauty. It is like comprehending an
abstruse mathematical concept, but not yet seeing how that idea pervades
and explains a whole host of other concepts different yet adjacent to
it.

In the valley of unity, the believer examines the cell, but perceives
the whole organism; he studies an atom, and understands how universes
are made; he reads a letter, and from its words perceives the mind and
intent of its author.

In this station, all of the Manifestations are understood as a single
Being, the way that the Sun, no matter what season, or time of day, has
always been, and will always be, the same Sun. "For they are all but one
person, one soul, one spirit, one being, one revelation." (Kitáb-i-Íqán)
In this station, the Writings of one Manifestation lead directly to the
others, and They are all in perfect harmony and accord. Although one
sees by a candle at night, and the sun during the day, in both cases he
sees by light and light alone.

Freed from the limitations of concrete perception, the believer is now
freed to explore the abstract and limitless. In this station, there is
no thing but which leads to his contentment; no atom that is not a
remembrance of His Lord; no word which is not a token from His true
Beloved. This station is the true paradise, because one is never apart,
and at each moment he lives in a continual state of prayer.

However, despite the profound universality of this station, there is
still the inherent friction of the believer's own identity with that of
His Beloved. He has not yet seen the reflection of the "Simurgh" within
the "sí murgh". His vision still originates from a meager pair of eyes,
and he does not yet see wholly with the eye of God.

In this final station, the self, which binds man's awareness to the
meager sphere of his own powers of conception, is sacrificed at the
altar of His Will, and thus the soul is freed roam throughout the
heavens of His Purpose. As Bahá'u'lláh writes: "For whatever the
creatures have is limited by their own limits, and whatever the True One
hath is sanctified therefrom..."

In this station, the sickness and sadness of all are felt, and the joy
of anyone is the believer's own joy. The unity of God's creation is
witnessed without bound or limitation, and "the high heavens are in no
conflict with the lowly earth." There are no longer words such as "He"
and "thee"; there has only ever been Him, the Ancient of Days, the One
alone Beloved.

Thus we see a progression from the lowest point, where the Manifestation
of God is seen as a man like any other; and the highest point, where His
Reality becomes the believer's own sight and mind. In this station, if
one accepts His Law, and commits his entire essence to its fulfillment,
then one has arrived at the gates of the Eternal City.

Can all of this happen within this world? I believe so. It is not a
journey of the soul from place to place; it is the unwrapping of our
hearts from the dense veils of limitation, debarring us from perceiving
that Perfect Sun shining in the midmost heart of creation:

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
How strange that while the Beloved is visible as the sun, yet the
heedless still hunt after tinsel and base metal. Yea, the intensity
of His revelation hath covered Him, and the fullness of His shining
forth hath hidden Him.

    Even as the sun, bright hath He shined,
    But alas, He hath come to the town of the blind!
#+END_EXAMPLE
