:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       9280C0A9-6E7B-402D-829C-05D9BCEEE942
:SLUG:     why-does-god-let-it-happen
:END:
#+filetags: :essays:
#+title: Why does God let it happen?

It is sometimes thought that while life could be wonderful, mankind is
just too flawed, corrupt or generally inept; or that the world we've
built is essentially broken, and the best we can do is struggle for
whatever mote of peace we're able to find.

In this picture of the world, God's Messengers are seen as agents of a
merciful, but distant Entity, sent to help us fix what our sins has
wrought. But with time, even the institutions They bring are perverted
by man. Evil runs rampant, the innocent are oppressed, sorrow and
hardship afflict the least deserving, and where is God? Why aren't His
Messengers a bit more effective, so all this heartache can end at least?
Why does God let it all happen?

In the mystical Writings of the Bahá'í Faith, we find indications that
not everything is as it seems: that there is a deep perfection in the
scheme of the world, even with its wars and venomous anger. It suggests
we might "attain a station wherein one seeth no distinction amongst His
creatures and findeth no flaw in the creation of the heavens and the
earth."[1]; that a wayfarer on the path of God "seeth in the fashionings
of the True One nothing save clear providence, and at every moment
saith: 'No defect canst thou see in the creation of the God of Mercy:
Repeat the gaze: Seest thou a single flaw?'[2]"[3]

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
"O Fleeting Shadow! Pass beyond the baser stages of doubt and rise to
the exalted heights of certainty. Open the eye of truth, that thou
mayest behold the veilless Beauty and exclaim: Hallowed be the Lord, the
most excellent of all creators!"[5]

#+END_QUOTE

To make sense of these statements, it is necessary to reorient our
thinking about the purpose of this life. If we imagine its aim to be our
personal happiness and joy, it is hard not to see the world as a
miserable joke for all but the favored few. However, this perspective
fails to make sense of existence because it chooses a wrong center:
human beings. It revolves the Sun of Truth around man's sense of
well-being, and diminishes virtue by favoring more immediate concerns,
such as health and long-life.

If we correct this perspective, and interpret our motions in reference
to a central Sun, we may find that creation was purpose-built with a
singular objective: for mankind to truly recognize the Manifestations of
God, a recognition that only begins with accepting their Mission and has
no end in a person's life. We are most sensitive to light when plunged
in darkness, and our heart is attuned to even minute joys when sadness
abounds. How can a man know God, if real knowledge is only gained
through contrast? In a way, this existence is as "not God" as it is
possible to be, so that with parched and thirsty lips we may drink one
drop of the Divine Elixir -- the Writings of His Holy Ones -- and
recognize Its savor in an instant.

Suffering is very real, but against eternal life it is unreal. None of
us can remember the pains we suffered as infants; why should our souls
remember the sorrows of this brief existence across eternity? We have a
precious chance in this life to know and to worship God, based entirely
on our faith and our choosing. There is a beauty and merit to this that
will never, ever come again. As Rumi wrote, "Don't seek the water;
increase your thirst."

Maybe paradise is not something you enter after you die; maybe paradise
is what you discover once you see the world aright.

Footnotes: [1] Bahá'u'lláh, Gems of Divine Mysteries, p.6

[2] Qur'án 67:3

[3] Bahá'u'lláh, The Seven Valleys, p.12

[4] Bahá'u'lláh, The Hidden Words, p.25
