:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       9B8FAB7A-0837-4681-8215-BCBF7C36138B
:SLUG:     thoughts-on-the-five-year-plan
:END:
---
title: Thoughts on the Five Year Plan (2016-2021)
tags: essays
---

I prepared the following speech for our Unit Convention today, about the
current Five Year Plan:

For various reasons, I've been reading the Five Year Plan quite often
this year, and studying it with others on many occasions. What all this
study has taught me is: I am no expert on this Plan. I have no idea what
its fulfillment is going to look like, even for Yolo. What I have
learned is that I can only understand by putting it into practice, by
failing here and there, reflecting, trying not to fail in quite the same
ways, and then studying some more. It only really makes real sense in
the trenches, so to speak, and there it shines rather beautifully
sometimes, I must say.

Because the fact is, we're doing something here that's never been
attempted before. If you look at the Encyclopedia Britannica, it lists
the Bahá'í Faith as one of the world's religions. If there was a card
game made about religions, we'd be just one card in that deck. But this
fails to recognize the truth that /nothing like this has ever happened
before/. Not even close. Every religion of the past, all the past
thousands of years, it is said, resulted in revealing just /two/ of the
letters of knowledge. With the Báb's Dispensation, all the remaining 25
letters were revealed. All of them, all at once! That's like 13x as much
knowledge, in the past 170 years, compared to all the thousands that
preceded it.

No one has ever seen a Faith like this, and no one knows what it will
become. Look at the world today. We lose so much of our potential to
wars, divisive politics, prejudice, hedonism, sexism -- so many -isms!
They say that humans, at any given moment, use no more than 10% of their
brain power. I bet the world has hardly reached 1% of its collective
brain power yet. We're like a slumbering giant who has never been fully
awake before. And that's what our Plans are doing: slowing bringing
consciousness to an enormous, sleeping beauty.

So what is the training institute about, really? Here's something
written on behalf of the Universal House of Justice that I think sums it
up rather well:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
[The agency of the training institute] ...strives to engage the
individual in an educational process in which virtuous conduct and
self-discipline are developed in the context of service, fostering a
coherent and joyful pattern of life that weaves together study, worship,
teaching, community building and, in general, involvement in other
processes that seek to transform society. At the heart of the
educational process is contact with the Word of God, whose power
sustains every individual's attempts to purify his or her heart and to
walk a path of service with "the feet of detachment".[1]

#+END_QUOTE

I find this to be such a holistic description of the training institute;
it talks about a joyful pattern that knits together the different
aspects of human life in the context of service, with its core centered
on the Word of God. The intention of the current Plans is to multiply
this pattern across the world until it becomes a new model for
civilization.

One of the nice things about the most recent Plan is that it lays out
for us a unfolding description of what the results of the Plan look like
at various stages, as the capacities of each community develop, and
certain developmental milestones are achieved. It starts with just a
small group of devoted friends, wishing to begin the educational
process; and ends with thousands upon thousands being served, maybe even
with ties to the functioning of local government.

Because one of the things we're doing in this epoch of the Formative Age
is to pivot on a global scale, and to turn our focus outward. Success
for us is not found in personal salvation, or admittance into heaven. We
are called upon to be the servants of all humanity, and our success is
the happiness of the world. And this has never been attempted before. No
Prophet in past memory has ever given His followers the mandate of
ministering to the needs of the whole Earth.

Now, that does sound like a pretty tall order, and I know it can often
seem like it's very far away; as if my actions today don't even have
that much of an impact. So I wanted to say something about the value of
individual initiative, and how important even the smallest of efforts is
in this Cause. Bahá'u'lláh writes:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
This Day a door is open wider than both heaven and earth. The eye of the
mercy of Him Who is the Desire of the worlds is turned towards all men.
An act, however infinitesimal, is, when viewed in the mirror of the
knowledge of God, mightier than a mountain. Every drop proffered in His
path is as the sea in that mirror.[2]

#+END_QUOTE

And in the Gleanings, He says:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
One righteous act is endowed with a potency that can so elevate the dust
as to cause it to pass beyond the heaven of heavens.[3]

#+END_QUOTE

One of the principles of our Faith is the harmony of science and
religion, and a beautiful thing about this principle is that it allows
us to look toward the physical world to gain understanding of spiritual
principles. In fact, in the Seven Valleys, Bahá'u'lláh said,

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
... if we ponder each created thing, we shall witness a myriad perfect
wisdoms, and learn a myriad new and wondrous truths.[4]

#+END_QUOTE

So where can we look to see the principle of a drop becoming a sea? If
you remember the movie Jurassic Park, one of the scientific ideas
popularized by that movie -- not bringing dinosaurs to life from a drop
of mosquitoes' blood, though -- was chaos theory. Well, one thing we've
learned from chaos theory is that the world is an intensely
interdependent system, with each part interacting with every other part.
In such a system, the beating of a butterfly's wings in the south China
sea can, through a chain of events, build up to a hurricane in the
Atlantic. Even though this chain of events is bound by the laws of
science, it remains completely unpredictable because of the sheer number
of variables involved in the equation.

Such a phenomenon explains how relatively minor events can have
disproportionately large outcomes. One person's prayer in America could
become the impetus for a large surge of activity in India, though we'd
never know it.

Or look at history. During the last ice age, average temperatures on
Earth were only twelve degree cooler than they are today. Here in West
Sacramento, you can often see forty degrees of difference within twelve
hours! But these twelve degrees, on a global scale, resulted in towers
of ice one mile thick covering large parts of North America.

What we're doing with these training institutes is not just about
education. There are many organizations that know a lot about education.
What we're teaching people is about their own nobility, their amazing
potential, and the extremely positive prospects offered by a world in
unity. We're striving to communicate the spirit of Bahá'u'lláh's
teachings, which have the power to warm and thaw human hearts. We're
starting slowly, and we're a small group, but if we warm these hearts by
just a few degrees, the interdependent nature of the two worlds -- this
Earth and the Abhá Kingdom -- will, at some point suddenly end this ice
age of spiritual darkness we've been stumbling through, and bring about
the dawn of our maturity as a species. It's not a long hill we have to
climb over thousands of years; all it requires is a small but determined
impetus, the beating of a butterfly's wings across the world, for forces
to be set in motion that can change everything. And that begins right
here, during this Plan.

I would like to end with these words from `Abdu'l-Bahá:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Lift up your hearts above the present and look with eyes of faith into
the future! Today the seed is sown, the grain falls upon the earth, but
behold the day will come when it shall rise a glorious tree and the
branches thereof shall be laden with fruit. Rejoice and be glad that
this day has dawned, try to realize its power, for it is indeed
wonderful[5]

#+END_QUOTE

Footnotes: [1] Extract from a letter dated 19 April 2013 written on
behalf of the Universal House of Justice to a number of individual
Bahá'ís resident in Europe

[2] Bahá'u'lláh, cited by Shoghi Effendi, /The Advent of Divine
Justice/, pp. 117-18

[3] Bahá'u'lláh, /Gleanings from the Writings of Bahá'u'lláh/, p. 287

[4] Bahá'u'lláh, /The Seven Valleys/, p. 32

[5] `Abdu'l-Bahá, /Paris Talks/, p. 68
