:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       36FD6D8B-AFF2-4A8D-8659-4D998C22B5C6
:SLUG:     theme-of-recognition
:END:
---
title: Recognition as an interpretive theme
tags: journal
---

Recognition of God's Manifestation is "the first duty prescribed by God
for His servants", yet this weighty theme may imply much more than just
acknowledgement of the station claimed by Bahá'u'lláh, perhaps offering
an approach to interpreting certain mystical statements that appear at
first to have difficult or impossible implications.

For instance, Bahá'u'lláh has written about the Seven Valleys that "any
soul who turns his face towards the Supreme Horizon and recognizes God
hath already traversed the seven valleys or seven stations mentioned in
that work." [provisional] Given the exalted character of the stations
described in that text, this seems to imply that recognition of God is a
fundamental, transformative characteristic of Bahá'í mysticism. It goes
far beyond the signing of a declaration card, or associating oneself
with His cause, implying such a change in one's perception of existence
that Bahá'u'lláh's statement that "every created thing in the whole
universe is but a door leading into His knowledge" becomes read not only
as a lofty theme, but as depicting the underlying fabric of spiritual
awareness.

If certain Bahá'í mystical Writings are examined from the perspective of
this recognition, they can take on a different character from
interpretations centered on the individual seeking to achieve them. For
example, Bahá'u'lláh's statement that "the heart wherein the least
remnant of envy yet lingers, shall never attain My everlasting
dominion", rather than indicating that the heart must be purged of envy
before the kingdom can be found, could be stating that so wondrous is
His Revelation, that one has not yet found its kingdom so long as
anything remains with power to beguile the seeker's heart.

Likewise other texts, including the stages and degrees of the Seven
Valleys and Gems of Divine Mysteries, can offer new insights when this
recognition is taken as a central point being made, presenting the idea
that progression through these stages may result from deepening one's
vision, and thus recognition, of the station of Bahá'u'lláh, the Ancient
Beauty.
