:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       DC458DDA-B407-4330-A9C2-2B9D91232C2A
:SLUG:     the-three-stations
:END:
---
title: The three stations
tags: journal
---

In these Seven Valleys Bahá'u'lláh describes the Valleys and Cities in
reference to three spiritual stations: the station of limitation
(tahdíd), comprising the first three valleys; the station of unity
(tawhíd), covering the next three; and then the station of annihilation
of self and subsistence in God (faná az nafs va baqá bi-lláh).

In the station of limitation the wayfarer understands Truth through the
medium of appearance and manifestation. It is in this station that one
talks about the differing stations and ranks among the Prophets of God,
and that one should not confound them (Gems is even more emphatic on
this point). This is when "when the wayfarer gazeth only upon the place
of appearance".

In the station of unity the wayfarer understands that all the
Manifestations reflect the same Light, and bring the same essential
Purpose and Message. These are those who "gaze upon the effulgence of
the light".

In the station of annihilation of self, one ceases entirely to judge the
Manifestation by human standards and limited concepts ("For whatever the
creatures have is limited by their own limits"), and instead beholds
Them all as being the same Soul, the same Spirit, and uttering the same
Word, with no distinction to made among them. These "have drunk of the
wine of oneness and... see nothing but the sun itself".

I read the differing planes as being the answer to this question, posed
by Bahá'u'lláh in Gems:

"Know then that it behoveth thine eminence to ponder from the outset
these questions in thy heart: What hath prompted the divers peoples and
kindreds of the earth to reject the Apostles whom God hath sent unto
them in His might and power, whom he hath raised up to exalt His Cause
and ordained to be the Lamps of eternity within the Niche of His
oneness? For what reason have the people turned aside from them,
disputed about them, risen against and contended with them? On what
grounds have they refused to acknowledge their apostleship and
authority, nay, denied their truth and reviled their persons, even
slaying or banishing them?"
